# s41586-026-10288-y

Nature | www.nature.com | 1
Article
The DNA virome varies with human genes
and environments
Nolan Kamitaki1,2,3,4,5,6 ✉, David Tang1,2,3,4, Steven A. McCarroll3,5,6,7 ✉ & Po-Ru Loh1,2,3 ✉
Many viruses have adapted to persist in infected humans for life1,2. Variable host control
of their ongoing abundance (viral load) can lead to clearance or disease3– 5. Here we
analysed the viral DNA load of 31 common viruses in human blood and saliva using
whole-genome sequencing data from UK Biobank (n = 490,401), All of Us (n = 414,817)
and Simons Foundation Powering Autism Research for Knowledge (SPARK; n = 12,519).
Viral DNA load varied markedly with age, time of day and season; most viruses were
also present at greater abundance in men than in women. Human genetic variation
at dozens of loci associated with DNA load of seven viruses: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV,
45 loci), human herpesvirus (HHV)-7 (37 loci), HHV-6B, Merkel cell polyomavirus and
three anelloviruses. Variation at the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) locus
generated the strongest associations (P = 5.8 × 10–9  to 2.5 × 10–1459 ), which were specific
to each virus. The HLA-B*08:01 allele also exhibited a host–virus genetic interaction
with EBV subtype (P = 7.4 × 10–70 ). Other human genetic effects implicated genes
encoding proteins that process peptides for antigen presentation, such as ERAP1
(HHV-7, P = 2.7 × 10–78 ) and ERAP2 (EBV, P = 4.6 × 10–111 ). Mendelian randomization
analyses supported a strong causal effect of EBV DNA load on increased risk of
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (P = 1.8 × 10–3 ), but not multiple sclerosis (P = 0.52). This suggests
that higher chronic EBV load increases lymphoma risk, whereas associations of EBV
infection with autoimmune conditions reflect host immune responses to particular
viral epitopes.
After infection by a virus, the long-term balance between viral replica-
tion and antiviral immune recognition within a person can result in
spontaneous clearance3, stable persistence around a set point of viral
load, as with lifelong EBV infection4, or progression to disease, such as
the progression from human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection to
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)5. EBV infection is a large
risk factor for Hodgkin’s lymphoma6 and multiple sclerosis7 years after
primary infection, and is associated with other autoimmune disorders
for reasons that are not well understood8.
Large-scale DNA sequencing studies of blood samples from thou-
sands of individuals have begun to characterize the blood DNA virome—
the population of DNA viruses and retroviruses that is resident within
each person’s blood system—which spans a broad spectrum of viral
species9,10. Two commonly observed taxa are herpesviruses, which are
latently present in most humans, and anelloviruses, which are thought
to be commensal or even symbiotic11. The amount of a virus present
within an individual—viral load—varies over time and is a potential
biomarker of immune function12–14 . Increased viral load may indicate
reduced immunocompetence and can lead to disease (such as AIDS or
liver cancer from viral hepatitis15), either as a direct result of inadequate
control of an existing virus or through susceptibility to new infection.
The extent to which viral load in blood—and in other tissues such
as saliva—varies among individuals and across the lifespan is less well
characterized, and the factors that drive such variation—and its poten-
tial effects on human health—are largely unknown. Human genetic
variants in the MHC region on chromosome 6 and a few other genomic
loci have been shown to influence load of HIV16,17 and hepatitis C18, and
chronic persistence (versus spontaneous clearance) of hepatitis B19
and C20. Less is known about variation in load of those viruses that
commonly reside latently in healthy individuals, although immune
(antibody) response to EBV and other common viruses is known to be
influenced by host genetics21,22. The drivers of viral load variation in
tissues other than blood also remain largely unexplored.
The DNA virome in blood and saliva
Many DNA viruses transit between latent infection and lytic activation
in blood and saliva. Blood and saliva are also the two primary sources
of genomic DNA in human population genetic studies. T o quantify viral
DNA load from widely available whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data,
we analysed sequencing reads that were previously generated from
high-coverage WGS (mean 32.5× to 42×) of 490,401 blood samples in UK
Biobank23 (UKB), 365,918 blood samples and 48,899 saliva samples in
the All of Us (AoU) dataset24 and 12,519 saliva samples in SPARK25 (Fig. 1a).
We aligned sequencing reads of potential non-human origin to a refer-
ence panel that we assembled of 31 common viruses (27 DNA viruses
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10288-y
Received: 27 August 2025
Accepted: 17 February 2026
Published online: xx xx xxxx
Open access
Check for updates
1Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 2Center for Data Sciences, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. 3Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 4Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. 5Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 6Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
7Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. ✉e-mail: nolan_kamitaki@hms.harvard.edu; smccarro@broadinstitute.org; poruloh@broadinstitute.org
2 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
and 4 retroviruses; Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1),
selected on the basis of earlier WGS-based blood virome studies9,10.
In the following analyses, we use the term ‘prevalence’ to refer to the
proportion of research participants with at least one WGS read pair
that aligns to a given viral genome and ‘abundance’ to mean the num-
ber of such read pairs from a given biological sample. The viral DNA
fragments counted in these measurements of viral DNA load could be
derived from viral genomes present within host cells or from cell-free
infectious particles (virions) present in bodily fluids. In blood, viral DNA
is known to be more frequently host-cell-derived for EBV26 and torque
teno viruses (TTVs; a common form of anelloviruses)14.
As in other cohorts9,10, viral DNA was infrequently detected in blood
WGS data from UKB and AoU, with most individuals having no sequenc-
ing reads that could be confidently attributable to any virus (Fig. 1b,c,
Extended Data Fig. 1b and Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). This was
expected despite the near-ubiquity of herpesviruses and anelloviruses
Align WGS reads to
human reference (hg38)
Call variants and genotype
Map to viral
genomes
Quantify
presence and
abundance
Individuals
Individuals
Viruses Variants
12,519 individuals (SPARK)
48,899 individuals (All of Us)
Human genotype matrix
Viral DNA load matrix
Blood Human reads
Viral reads
Mixed DNA
Mapped
Unmapped
Saliva
AA GA GG AA GG GA
CA CC CC CC CA AA
CT CT CT CC CT TT
GG GG GG GA AA GA
490,401 individuals (UK Biobank)
365,918 individuals (All of Us)
Associate
a
b c
d e
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0 1 2
[3,10)[10,30)[30,100)[100,300)[300,1k)[1k,3k)[3k,10k)[10k,30k)
≥30k
Number of read pairs
Proportion of individuals
Virus
Blood Blood
EBV
HHV-6B
HHV-7
Virus
EBV
HHV-6B
HHV-7
B19V
HHV-6BHHV-6A
HHV-7
TTV (VT416)
CMV
EBV
TTV (TUS01)
TTV (HD14a)
eHHV-6A
eHHV-6B
1
10
100
1,000
0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Mean abundance (no. of read pairs)
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0 1 2
[3,10)[10,30)[30,100)[100,300)[300,1k)[1k,3k)[3k,10k)[10k,30k)
≥30k
Number of read pairs
Proportion of individuals
HAdV-B HHV-6B
HPV18
HPV16
HHV-7
HSV-1
TTV (VT416)
HAdV-E
CMV
EBV
KIPyV
WUPyV MCPyV
TTV (TUS01)
HPyV6
HPyV7
TTV (HD14a)
eHHV-6A
eHHV-6B
1
10
100
1,000
0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Mean abundance (no. of read pairs)
Saliva Saliva
Fig. 1 | Detection and quantification of viral DNA load in blood and saliva
WGS. a, Detection (presence or absence) and quantification (abundance) of
viral DNA sequences in WGS data derived from human blood and saliva samples,
including blood samples from the UKB ( n = 490,401) and AoU (n = 365,918)
cohorts and saliva samples from the SPARK ( n = 12,519) and AoU (n = 48,899)
cohorts. Sequence reads that did not map to the human genome were aligned
against a reference panel of 31 viral genomes to identify and tabulate viral DNA
fragments. b, Distribution of viral DNA fragment counts (read pairs) from EBV,
HHV-7 and HHV-6B genomes in blood-derived WGS data from UKB participants
(n = 490,401). c, Prevalence (population frequency) and mean abundance of
viral DNA sequences in UKB blood WGS data. Mean abundance indicates the
geometric mean of the number of observed read pairs among samples in which
the virus was detected. For HHV-6, data from carriers of chromosomally
integrated endogenous HHV-6A and HHV-6B are indicated separately in grey.
Viruses that appear in subsequent figures are indicated with colours. CMV,
cytomegalovirus. d, Distribution of viral DNA fragment counts (read pairs)
from EBV, HHV-7 and HHV-6B genomes in saliva-derived WGS data from SPARK
participants ( n = 12,519). e, Prevalence and abundance of viral DNA sequences
in SPARK saliva WGS data. HAdV-B, human adenovirus species B; HAdV-E,
human adenovirus species E; HPV16, human papillomavirus 16; HPyV6, human
polyomavirus 6; HSV, herpes simplex virus; KIPyV, KI polyomavirus; WUPyV,
WU polyomavirus.
Nature | www.nature.com | 3
in humans across populations11 (for example, 94.7% EBV seroprevalence
in UKB), given the low fractions of latently infected cells that carry viral
DNA4 (Methods): viral reads are stochastically observed at rates propor-
tional to the number of copies of a viral genome present in a person’s
blood. Despite this sparsity, several properties of the dataset, such as
enrichment of viral reads in seropositive individuals and consistent
depth-of-coverage within viral genomes, supported genuine viral ori-
gin of these reads (Extended Data Figs. 1c,d and 2 and Supplementary
Note 1). Additionally, a large majority of the sequencing reads ascer-
tained to be of viral origin had been aligned to a viral reference genome
with high mapping quality (Supplementary Note 2). Different viruses
tended not to be co-observed much more frequently than by chance,
with the exception of anelloviruses (Extended Data Fig. 1e). A small frac-
tion of blood samples (675 out of 490,401 in UKB) exhibited unusually
large numbers of parvovirus B19-derived reads9,10; these donors had
greatly depleted reticulocyte counts (P = 1.4 × 10−67 ; Extended Data
Fig. 1f), consistent with active viral infection of red blood cell precursors
by B19V27. High, approximately 15× coverage of the HHV-6A or HHV-6B
genome by WGS reads was also observed in around 1% of donors (Fig. 1c
and Extended Data Fig. 1b,g), indicating inheritance of haplotypes con-
taining copies of these viral genomes that have integrated into human
chromosomes (endogenous HHV-6 (eHHV-6))28. These carriers (0.32%
of donors with eHHV-6A and 1.03% with eHHV-6B, comparable to previ-
ous work28,29) were excluded from analyses of HHV-6 viral DNA load.
In contrast to blood, saliva WGS data contained viral DNA sequences
that were highly prevalent and abundant in SPARK (Fig. 1d,e and Sup-
plementary Table 4) and AoU (Extended Data Fig. 1h and Supplemen-
tary Table 5) data. Several herpesviruses exhibited prominent bimodal
distributions of observed viral read counts, with saliva WGS samples
tending to either contain no reads from the virus or to contain many
such reads (tens, hundreds or thousands; Fig. 1d). This suggests that for
these viruses that infect more than 90% of people, viral DNA in saliva
originates not from constantly present latent infections, but rather
from frequent bursts of active (lytic) viral replication and release that
vary widely in intensity. For HHV-7, these lytic episodes appear to occur
continuously, such that HHV-7 DNA was detectable in nearly all saliva
samples from adults (Extended Data Fig. 1h), whereas for EBV, viral shed-
ding in saliva appears to be common but intermittent, with roughly half
of saliva samples exhibiting no EBV DNA (Fig. 1d). In contrast to herpes-
viruses, DNA from anelloviruses was detected in saliva only modestly
more frequently than in blood, typically at low abundances (one or a few
reads; Fig. 1c,e), consistent with anelloviruses having a distinct replica-
tion cycle30. Several viruses that were rarely detected in blood (less than
0.1% prevalence) were detected in saliva at low to moderate prevalence
(Fig. 1c,e). Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV)—which commonly infects
skin cells and can cause Merkel cell carcinoma—was seen in 5.7% of saliva
samples (Fig. 1e), supporting a previous study31. Endogenous HHV-6A
and HHV-6B were observed in SPARK at rates similar to UKB (0.37% and
0.78%, respectively; Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 1i). Viral DNA load
levels were broadly independent of autism spectrum disorder status
in SPARK (Extended Data Fig. 1j,k) and were consistent between SPARK
and AoU saliva samples (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 1h).
Viral DNA load varies with age, sex and time
The measurement of the prevalence and abundance of diverse viruses
in the blood and saliva of so many people made it possible to recog-
nize correlations with age, sex and circadian and seasonal dynam -
ics through cross-sectional analyses of the large cohort. Age and
sex exhibited strong associations with viral DNA load (Fig. 2a–d). In
blood samples from UKB, which recruited participants aged 40–70
years, viral DNA prevalence of EBV and TTVs was greater in older
individuals (P = 6.7 × 10−356  and 1.4 × 10−451 , respectively; regression),
as recently observed for TTVs14, whereas viral DNA prevalence was
greater in younger individuals for HHV-7 (P = 6.7 × 10−200 ) and HHV-6B
(P = 1.7 × 10−28 ), suggesting that viral load of HHV-7 and HHV-6B decline
with age (Fig. 2b). In saliva samples from SPARK, which represented
infancy to old age, viral DNA loads within age tranches (measured by
viral read prevalence or mean abundance) exhibited trajectories that
varied markedly with age and across viruses (Fig. 2a and Extended Data
Figs. 1d and 3a–d). Most viruses appear to increase rapidly in preva -
lence in the first several years of life (Fig. 2a), presumably reflecting pri-
mary infection, after which EBV DNA prevalence continued to increase
with age (P = 7.6 × 10−140 ), whereas HHV-6B DNA prevalence decreased
sharply and steadily from childhood onwards (P = 6.4 × 10−315 ; Fig. 2a),
perhaps indicating increasing control by the adaptive immune system
of the host over life. HHV-7 viral read prevalence in saliva increased
steadily to more than 95% before modestly decreasing in middle age
(P = 6.1 × 10−585 ; Fig.  2a), consistent with the pattern in UKB blood
samples (Fig. 2b), whereas HHV-7 viral abundance in saliva began to
decrease in childhood (P = 6.6 × 10−194 ; Extended Data Fig. 3c), suggest-
ing diminishing intensity or frequency of lytic events.
Notably, viral DNA load was consistently higher in men than in
women, across seven viruses and in both blood and saliva (Fig. 2a–d).
This aligns with observations of stronger immune responses and lower
viral load of HIV and hepatitis B in women relative to men32. These sex
differences in viral DNA load appeared to emerge in adolescence
(Fig. 2a). Viral DNA prevalence also displayed substantial circadian
and seasonal variation (Fig. 2e,f and Extended Data Fig. 3e–l) that was
robust to potential confounders (Supplementary Note 3), although
confounding by unmeasured visit-related factors cannot be fully
excluded. Viral read prevalence increased by about 1.2–1.3-fold from
09:00 to 20:00 (based on recorded times of blood sample acquisi -
tion) for both EBV and HHV-7, but with somewhat different trajectories
over the course of the day (Kronos33 harmonic regression P = 1.2 × 10−9
and 3.3 × 10−23 , respectively; Fig. 2e). EBV viral read prevalence was
also about 1.3-fold higher in winter compared with summer months,
whereas HHV-7 showed different, more modest seasonal variation
(Kronos P = 2.9 × 10−101  and 9.8 × 10−12 , respectively; Fig. 2f). These pat-
terns replicated in AoU saliva samples (for EBV; Extended Data Fig. 3k,l)
and were not driven by cyclical variation in lymphocyte percentages
in UKB blood samples, which exhibited weaker and different patterns
(Extended Data Fig. 3m,n). The high prevalence of EBV reads in saliva
with similar circadian patterns as blood, together with the bimodal
abundance of EBV DNA in saliva (Fig. 1d), suggests lytic events may
be quite frequent and play a larger role in determining systemic load.
Viral DNA load also exhibited prominent, several-fold variation across
genetic ancestries, with different viruses enriched in different ancestry
groups (Extended Data Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 6 and Supplemen-
tary Note 4). These patterns were robust to controlling for available
socioeconomic variables (Supplementary Note 4).
Human genetics shapes viral DNA load
Almost all human traits are shaped by genetic variation in ways that
can elucidate molecular mechanisms. T o identify such human genetic
effects on viral DNA load, we performed genome-wide association stud-
ies (GWAS) on viral DNA load phenotypes in UKB and AoU (Methods).
For viral DNA load in blood, we then meta-analysed results across UKB
and AoU. Common variation (minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.1%) at
82 loci in the human genome associated (at P < 5 × 10−8 ) with viral DNA
load of one or more viruses in blood (of 6 tested): 45 loci for EBV, 3 loci for
HHV-6B, 37 loci for HHV-7, 6 loci for TTV (TUS01), 6 loci for TTV (HD14a)
and 2 loci for TTV (VT416) (Fig. 3a–c, Extended Data Fig. 5 and Sup -
plementary Table 7). Common variants also associated with viral DNA
load in saliva samples from AoU for EBV (2 loci), HHV-6B (3 loci), HHV-7
(12 loci) and MCPyV (2 loci) (Extended Data Fig. 6). We verified that these
associations were not driven by misalignment of human reads to viral
genomes (Extended Data Fig. 7a,b and Supplementary Note 5), were
concordant between UKB and AoU (Extended Data Fig. 7c–e), reflected
4 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
e f
Hour of day
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
8
10
12
14
16
18
EBV  P = 1.6 × 10−8
HHV-7  P = 5.9 × 10–16
Month of year
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
8
10
12
14
16 EBV  P = 6.3 x 10–80
HHV-7  P = 1.4 × 10–6
a
c d
b
Age (years)
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
40−44 45−49 50−54 55−59 60−64 65−69
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
EBV
HHV-6B
HHV-7
TTVs
Male Female
EBV
HHV-6B
HHV-7
Male Female
Age (years)
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
0−12−45−9 15−1910−14 20−29 30−39 40−49 50−5960+
0
20
40
60
80
100
MCPyV
Blood
Blood Blood
Saliva
EBV HHV-7 HHV-6B TTVs CMV MCPyV HSV-1
6.0
6.5
7.0
4
6
8
10
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
0.30
0.35
0.40
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
52.5
55.0
57.5
60.0
1.150
1.175
1.200
1.225
95
96
97
98
8.4
8.7
9.0
9.3
50
52
54
56
58
14.0
14.5
15.0
15.5
16.0
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Female Male Female Male
EBV HHV-7 HHV-6B CMV MCPyV
2
3
4
5
3.6
4.0
4.4
4.8
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
75
100
125
150
140
160
180
200
Mean abundance (no. of read pairs)
Saliva
Blood Blood BloodSaliva Saliva Saliva SalivaBlood Saliva Blood Saliva
P = 6.8 × 10–77
P = 1.2 × 10–41
P = 1.6 × 10–35
P = 6.5 × 10–7
P = 0.84
P = 1.7 × 10–11
P = 6.6 × 10–355
P = 9.3 × 10–8
P = 4.7 × 10–5
P = 3.6 × 10–155
P = 0.12
P = 6.2 × 10–19
P = 2.1 × 10–65
P = 3.2 x 10–13
P = 0.37
P = 2.3 × 10–60
Fig. 2 | Age, sex, time of day and time of year associations with viral DNA
load. a, Prevalence of viral DNA sequences by age and sex in saliva-derived WGS
from SPARK (n = 12,519 total, 58–1,582 participants per age–sex bin). Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. b , Prevalence of viral DNA sequences by
age and sex in blood-derived WGS from UKB. Anellovirus (TTV) measurements
group together reads aligned to the TUS01, HD14a and VT416 reference genomes
(n = 482,882 total, 22,896–63,810 participants per age–sex bin). Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. c , Prevalence of viral DNA sequences by
sex in blood-derived WGS from UKB (EBV, HHV-7, HHV-6B, TTV: n  = 222,094
men and 263,132 women) and AoU (CMV: n = 143,918 men and 220,649 women)
and saliva-derived WGS from AoU (EBV, CMV, MCPyV, HSV-1: n = 17,335 men and
31,425 women) and SPARK (HHV-7, HHV-6B: n = 3,378 fathers and 3,380 mothers).
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. d , Abundance of viral DNA
sequences by sex in saliva-derived WGS from AoU (EBV: n  = 9,973 men and
15,856 women; CMV: n = 409 men and 622 women; MCPyV: n = 1,840 men and
1,185 women) and SPARK (HHV-7: n = 3,288 fathers and 3,217 mothers; HHV-6B:
n = 1,945 fathers and 1,762 mothers). Centres indicate mean and error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. e , Prevalence of viral DNA sequences in
UKB blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to the nearest
hour, n = 490,136 total, 6,618–52,949 participants per hour). Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. f , Prevalence of viral DNA sequences
in UKB blood WGS data by month of sample collection ( n = 490,136 total,
27,364–51,195 participants per month). Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals. P values from two-sided linear regression ( c,d) or one-sided ANOVA
test between models with and without collection hour ( e) or month (f)
(see Methods).
Nature | www.nature.com | 5
a
d
b
c
e f g
Chromosome
– log10(EBV DNA load P)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 20 22 X
2.5
5
10
20
40
80
160
320
640
PTPN22
SLAMF7
SLC8A1
BCL11A
CTLA4
EOMES
CCR2
PARP15
ACTRT3
BCL6
DGKQ
TERT
ERAP1/ERAP2
SLC22A4/SLC22A5
IRF4 HLA
CPVL
IKZF1
CRTAM
LTBR
SH2B3
UBAC2
TNFSF13B
TRAF3
ITGAL
IRF8 TNFRSF13BKSR1
GSDMB
BCL2CD70BCL3LILRB1/LILRA1
GGT5
hg
EBV
HHV-7
TTV
(VT416)
TTV
(TUS01)
TTV
(HD14a)
0
0.01
2
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05 MHC
Non-MHC
24 26 28 30 32 34
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
– log10(EBV DNA load P)
HLA-A
HLA-B
HLA-C
HLA-DRB1
HLA-DQA1
HLA-DQB1
HLA-DPA1
HLA-DPB1
HLA-coding variants
24 26 28 30 32 34
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
– log10(HHV-7 DNA load P)
HLA-A
HLA-B
HLA-C
HLA-DRB1
HLA-DQA1
HLA-DQB1
HLA-DPA1
HLA-DPB1
HLA-coding variants
96.6 96.8 97.0 97.2
0
20
40
60
80
Chromosome 5 position (Mb)
–log10(P)
ERAP1Q730E
ERAP1K528R
ERAP2 NMD
CAST
ERAP1
ERAP2
LNPEP LIX1 RIOK2
EBV
HHV-7
Chromosome
– log10(HHV-7 DNA load P)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 18 20 22 X
CD2
NCF2
DENND1B
SLC8A1
MCM6
SP110
EOMES
SENP7
IL12A
ERAP1/ERAP2
CASC15
HLABACH2
FOXK1
JAZF1
TNFRSF10A
MCM4
ABO
BET1L
PARP11CD4
HELB
KLRC1−KLRC4
VPS37B
FLT3
TRIM13
PML
NLRC5RPAIN SLFN5
SMARCE1
EPS15L1
MVB12A
MX2
2.5
5
10
20
40
80
160
320
640
Chromosome
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1415 16 17 18 20 22 X
– log10(TTV (TUS01)
DNA load P)
2.5
5
10
20
40
80
160
PRDX6
FOXP1
HLA
TNFAIP3
FAS
TBKBP1
Other MHC region variants
DRB1*04:04
Other MHC region variants
rs9265884
Fig. 3 | Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load in blood.
a, Genome-wide associations of human genetic variants with EBV DNA load in
blood (inverse-normal transformed abundance), meta-analysed across UKB
(n = 453,770) and AoU (n = 201,168) European-ancestry sub-cohorts. b, Genome-
wide associations with HHV-7 DNA load in blood (inverse-normal transformed
abundance), meta-analysed across UKB ( n = 453,770) and AoU (n = 200,091)
European-ancestry sub-cohorts. c , Genome-wide associations with anellovirus
TUS01 DNA load in blood (inverse-normal transformed abundance), meta-
analysed across UKB ( n = 453,770) and AoU (n = 200,091) European-ancestry
sub-cohorts. d, Estimates of heritability from common genetic variants for viral
DNA load phenotypes from variants within versus outside of the MHC region
of the human genome, defined as 24–35 Mb on chromosome 6 ( n = 419,421
unrelated UKB participants with European ancestry). Error bars represent
95% confidence intervals. e, Associations of variants in the MHC region of the
human genome with EBV DNA load in blood in UKB participants with European
ancestry. f, Analogous to e, for HHV-7 DNA load. g, Associations of common
genetic variants at the ERAP1 – ERAP2 – LNPEP locus with EBV DNA load (green)
and HHV-7 DNA load (blue) in blood. Arrows indicate direction of transcription
for nearby genes. Associations of two missense variants in ERAP1  and a cryptic
splice variant in ERAP2  are indicated with diamonds.
6 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
distinct effects in blood versus saliva (Extended Data Fig. 7f–i), and
did not overlap any of the ten telomeric sites of eHHV-6 chromosomal
integration that we identified in UKB data (Extended Data Fig. 7j,k and
Supplementary Note 6).
For six of the above seven viruses (all except HHV-6B), the MHC
region harboured the strongest associations between common human
genetic variants and viral DNA load (Fig. 3a–c, Extended Data Figs. 5
and 6 and Supplementary Table 7). The MHC region as a whole contrib-
uted large proportions of viral DNA load heritability (56% for EBV, 32%
for HHV-7 and 14–30% for the anelloviruses in UKB; Fig. 3d), as previ -
ously observed for HIV17. Association patterns in the MHC region—the
specific associating single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their
relative strengths of association—were unique to each virus (Fig.  3e,f
and Supplementary Table 8). For EBV viral DNA load in blood, the top
genetic association was generated by the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) DRB1*04:04 allele (Fig. 3e), which associated with almost twofold
increased prevalence of EBV reads (23.0% (s.e.m. 0.2%) in heterozy-
gous carriers versus 13.6% (s.e.m. 0.05%) in non-carriers). DRB1 is a
co-receptor that EBV binds to enter human cells34; DRB1*04:04 might
encode an isoform with higher affinity for EBV protein gp42, facilitat-
ing infection. Several other independent associations with EBV DNA
load were centred in or near other HLA genes (Fig. 3e). This pattern
was also observed (but less pronounced) for HHV-7 (Fig. 3f ). Some
of these associations are likely to reflect the role of the HLA system in
viral antigen presentation and immune response; specific HLA alleles
that strongly enable presentation of peptides from a given virus may
drive distinct effects of HLA alleles on load of different viruses. Genetic
variation in the MHC region has also been observed to associate with
measurements of several anti-EBV antibodies22, but only a subset of
these serological measurements (VCA-p18 and ZEBRA) exhibited asso-
ciation patterns similar to that of EBV DNA load (Extended Data Fig. 8
and Supplementary Note 7), suggesting that levels of some but not all
antibodies are influenced by viral DNA load.
The strong associations of HLA alleles with viral DNA load enabled
us to characterize how these genetic effects vary across individuals as
a function of age and other genotypes (Extended Data Fig. 9a–h and
Supplementary Note 8). Some associations of variants in the MHC
region with EBV DNA load also exhibited specificity to blood or saliva;
in particular, the HLA-A*02:01 allele appeared to decrease EBV DNA
load in blood (P = 2.9 × 10−431 ) but have no effect on EBV DNA load in
saliva (P = 0.099; Extended Data Fig. 9i), consistently across cohorts
(Extended Data Fig. 9j). One possible explanation is that A*02:01 could
present a peptide from a latent-phase EBV antigen, which could help
control infection in blood but have little effect on recognition of the
lytically infected plasma or epithelial cells that more directly influence
viral DNA load in saliva.
Haplotypes at the ERAP1–ERAP2–LNPEP locus (on chromosome 5),
which encodes the ERAP1, ERAP2 and LNPEP peptidases that process
peptides for MHC display35, associated strongly with DNA load of EBV
(P = 1.8 × 10−77  in UKB) and HHV-7 (P = 2.7 × 10−78 ; Fig. 3g). For HHV-7,
the association signal appeared to be driven by two missense variants
in ERAP1 (in high linkage disequilibrium with each other, r2 = 0.7) that
affect substrate preference (Q730E) and enzymatic activity (K528R)36.
By contrast, EBV DNA load associated more strongly with variation
near ERAP2 and LNPEP, including a common cryptic splice variant
(rs2248374) that generates a truncated ERAP2 transcript that under-
goes nonsense-mediated decay37.
Beyond the very large effects from the HLA and ERAP1– ERAP2– LNPEP
loci, each virus associated with additional human genomic loci (Fig. 3a–c,
Extended Data Figs. 5 and 6 and Supplementary Table 7). These loci
contained many genes with known or likely roles in viral infection,
immune evasion and proliferation. Some of these loci, such as the
B cell lymphoma (BCL) genes (associated with EBV DNA load), are likely
to encode alleles that affect survival and proliferation of infected host
cells38. By contrast, PML, SP110 and MX2 (associated with HHV-7 and/or
HHV-6B DNA load) encode nuclear proteins with roles in restricting
herpesvirus replication39,40. Associations at genes that influence apop-
tosis (FAS, TNFAIP3 and TBKBP1) suggest that virally induced apoptosis
signalling might be particularly important for anellovirus survival41. At
the ABO locus, which determines the presence of blood group antigens
bound by some viruses42, alleles that produce type A and type B antigens
both associated with higher HHV-7 DNA load (Extended Data Fig. 9k,l).
Associations at the LILR (leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor) and
CPVL (carboxypeptidase vitellogenic like) genes, like the strong asso-
ciations at HLA and ERAP1/ERAP2, indicated the importance of genetic
variation that modulates viral peptide presentation and recognition43,44.
Gene-level burden tests of rare loss-of-function and missense variants
in UKB additionally identified four genes in which rare protein-coding
variants associated with increased viral DNA load: TERT and ASAH2B
for EBV, and MX2 and ZNF584 for HHV-7 (P < 2.8 × 10−6 ; Supplementary
Table 9). These associations appeared to be virus-specific, except for
ZNF584, for which rare coding variants also associated with increased
EBV DNA load (P = 3.1 × 10−3 ). At two loci (CPVL and TNFRSF13B) at which
a missense variant generated the top common-variant association with
EBV DNA load, the burden test demonstrated concordant associations
of loss-of-function variants in these genes (Extended Data Fig. 9m,n).
The strong ancestry differences in viral DNA load (Extended Data
Fig. 4 and Supplementary Note 4) led us to query whether GWAS of
EBV and HHV-7 DNA load in AoU participants with African ancestry
(n = 77,573) might identify specific loci contributing to these dif -
ferences. These analyses identified a novel association at ACKR1:
the rs2814778-CC genotype that generates the malaria-protective
Duffy-null phenotype45 appeared to explain 28% [21%–35%] and 45%
[38%–52%] of the African-versus-European ancestry differences in
EBV and HHV-7 DNA prevalence, respectively, and these associations
are only partially explained by neutropaenia in Duffy-null individuals46
(Extended Data Fig. 10 and Supplementary Note 9).
HLA-B*08:01 association is EBV type-specific
EBV is known to exist in two main strains, type 1 and type 2, which differ
primarily in the sequences of key latency-associated EBV genes47 and
may interact differently with the host immune system. This raises the
possibility that some human genetic variants involved in host–virus
genetic interactions—for example, HLA alleles with affinities for spe-
cific viral peptides—might associate specifically with viral DNA load of
one EBV type but not the other, as has been observed for hepatitis C48.
T o search for such effects, we separately quantified type 1 and type
2 EBV by realigning WGS reads to EBV type 1 and type 2 reference geno-
mes and identifying reads that aligned within two type-informative
genomic regions (EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C)49 (Fig. 4a, Extended Data
Fig. 11a,b and Methods). The prevalence of reads from EBV type 2 relative
to type 1 varied significantly by an individual’s place of birth (Fig. 4b,c
and Extended Data Fig. 11c), as expected50. EBV type 2 was relatively
more prevalent in individuals born in Africa50 compared with individuals
born in Europe (P = 5.4 × 10−7 ) or North America (P = 0.042; Fig. 4b), and
its relative prevalence also varied regionally among individuals born
in the UK (Fig. 4c), independently of overall EBV prevalence (Extended
Data Fig. 11d). Notably, quantitative antibody responses to EBV antigens
were slightly higher in individuals with type 2 EBV than in those with type
1 EBV (Extended Data Fig. 11e–h), suggesting that type 2 EBV might gener-
ate a stronger autoimmune response for autoantigen epitope mimics.
Genetic association analyses leveraging this additional information
about EBV type suggested that HLA variation confers type-specific pro-
tection against EBV infection (Fig. 4d–g). In analyses of EBV type 1 and
type 2 DNA load separately, association patterns in the MHC region
(Fig. 4d,e) were broadly similar to those that we had observed for total
EBV DNA load (Fig. 3e), presumably reflecting the contributions of
many human genetic effects that were difficult to resolve. However, a
case-case association analysis—in which genetic data from individuals
Nature | www.nature.com | 7
a
c
d
e
f
g
b
0 50000 100000 150000
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
EBV genomic position
Proportion of individuals with
reads mapping to 500-bp bin
EBNA2 EBNA3A–EBNA3C
Type 2
Type 1
EBV type 1 DNA presence vs absence
EBV type 2 DNA presence vs absence
EBV type 1 DNA presence vs EBV type 2 presence
EBV type 1 DNA presence vs EBV type 2 DNA presence | B*08:01
10 20 30 40
Percentage of individuals with
EBV type 2-speci/f_ic reads
Oceania
North America
Caribbean
USA
South America
Europe
Ireland
UK
Germany
Africa
Ghana
Nigeria
Kenya
Asia
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
India
Place of birth
60° N
58° N
56° N
54° N
52° N
50° N
6° W 4° W2° W
0°
Percentage of individuals
with EBV type 2-
speci/f_ic reads
10
12
14
0
20
40
60
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
0
20
40
60
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
B*08:01
0
10
20
30
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
B*08:01
0.250.500.751.00
0.250.500.751.00
0
50
100
150
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
–log10(P)
R2
0.250.500.751.00
B*08:01
–log10(P)–log10(P)–log10(P)
R2
R2
Fig. 4 | Analyses of EBV type 1 and type 2 identify a type-specific association
with HLA-B*08:01.  a, Frequencies of observing WGS reads mapping to each
500 bp segment of the EBV type 1 (black line) and type 2 (green line) reference
genomes in saliva WGS samples from SPARK ( n = 12,519). Highlighted in grey
are two regions used to distinguish EBV types, both containing genes with
known type-specific sequences, EBNA2  and EBNA3A– EBNA3C. Read alignments
in these two regions show consistent ratios of type 1-aligned to type 2-aligned
reads, whereas other EBV genomic regions (that are not type-informative) do
not. b, Proportion of UKB participants positive for EBV type 2 (among EBV
DNA-positive individuals) by location of birth. In each group, the proportion
was estimated as the number of UKB blood WGS samples containing two or
more EBV type 2-specific reads divided by the number containing two or more
type 1-specific or two or more type 2-specific reads (total n = 11,511 participants).
Estimates are shown for countries of birth with more than 35 samples containing
a type-specific read, and for continental groupings (aggregated across
all countries; diamonds). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
c, Proportion of UKB participants positive for EBV type 2 by region of birth
within the UK (n = 9,769). Map source: Office for National Statistics, licensed
under the Open Government Licence v.3.0 and Contains OS data. Crown
copyright and database rights 2017–2026. d, Associations of variants in the
MHC region of the human genome with EBV type 1 positivity (presence of
two or more WGS reads that mapped to type-informative regions of the EBV
type 1 genome) in UKB blood WGS (n = 418,403 unrelated participants with
European ancestry). Variants are coloured by linkage disequilibrium relative
to HLA-B*08:01  (green-to-purple shading), indicated by the large green dot.
e, Associations of variants with EBV type 2 positivity. f , Associations of variants
with EBV type 2 positivity, using individuals with EBV type 1 positivity as controls
(n = 9,233 unrelated participants with European ancestry). g , Conditional
associations of variants with EBV type 2 positivity, using individuals with
EBV type 1 positivity as controls, after including HLA-B*08:01  genotype as a
covariate. P values by two-sided linear regression ( d– g).
8 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
with higher type 2 DNA load were compared against genetic data from
those with higher type 1 DNA load—generated a readily interpretable
association pattern led by the MHC class I B*08:01 allele (P = 7.4 × 10−70 ;
Fig. 4f). B*08:01 appeared to be protective against type 1 EBV (odds
ratio (OR) = 0.62 [0.59–0.66] for observing a type 1 read; P = 7.1 × 10−72 )
but associated with increased risk for type 2 EBV (OR = 1.63 [1.48–1.80];
P = 4.1 × 10−24 ), suggesting that it may have high affinity for one or more
peptides derived from the type 1 EBNA-2 or EBNA-3 proteins, but not
homologous type 2 proteins. A possible candidate is an antigen from
EBNA-3A that enables type 1-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activ-
ity and is B*08:01-restricted51,52. Conditional association analyses that
included B*08:01 as a covariate suggested that this haplotype accounts
for most of the type-specific association signal in the MHC region, with
some remaining associations of variation in the MHC class I and II regions
(Fig. 4g).
EBV DNA load is a risk factor for Hodgkin’s lymphoma
We next sought to identify associations between viral DNA load and the
abundant biological and clinical phenotypes available for the 490,401
UKB research participants. We identified 181 significant associations
between viral DNA load and disease phenotypes, and 366 with blood
count, biomarker and metabolite measurements (Bonferroni-corrected
P < 0.05; Fig. 5a and Supplementary Tables 10–13). Most of the disease
associations involved higher viral DNA loads in affected individuals
(Extended Data Fig. 12a), and many associated diseases involved inflam-
mation or weakened immune function, such as AIDS, anaemia, diabetes
and renal failure (Fig. 5a). Organ transplantation associated strongly
with increased anellovirus DNA load, presumably reflecting use of
post-transplant immunosuppression medication 14. Concordantly,
individuals taking common immunosuppressive drugs had elevated
EBV and anellovirus DNA loads (Supplementary Table 14); this could
explain some of the observed disease associations. Carrier status for
endogenous HHV-6B or HHV-6A did not significantly associate with any
biological or clinical phenotypes (Supplementary Table 10).
Many of the strongest associations of EBV and HHV-7 DNA load with
disease phenotypes were directly or indirectly related to smoking (for
example, nicotine dependence, respiratory disorders and lung cancer;
Fig. 5a and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11). Cumulative smoking expo-
sure (pack-years) strongly associated with increased prevalence of EBV
DNA, which was nearly twice as high for the heaviest smokers compared
with nonsmokers (P = 3.3 × 10−195 ; Fig. 5b). By contrast, smoking exposure
associated with decreased prevalence of HHV-7 DNA (P = 9.6 × 10−22 ;
Fig. 5b). Cigarettes smoked per day associated with similar trends
(P = 3.3 × 10−563  and 2.7 × 10−9  for increased EBV prevalence and decreased
HHV-7 prevalence, respectively; Fig. 5c), suggesting that smoking has
strong, opposite effects on viral DNA load for EBV and HHV-7. These asso-
ciations were replicated in AoU blood samples (Extended Data Fig. 12b)
and in AoU saliva samples; smoking associated with an increase not only
in EBV prevalence (P = 3.6 × 10−18 ) but also in EBV abundance among
EBV DNA-positive individuals (P = 4.2 × 10−8 , Extended Data Fig. 12c,d).
The large number of genetic effects on EBV DNA load identified by
our GWAS provided an opportunity to investigate the causal direction
of phenotypic associations—that is, whether viral DNA load affects
(or is affected by) the clinical phenotypes with which it associates.
We did this by using these DNA load-influencing SNPs as instrument
variables for Mendelian randomization, testing whether or not the
genetic variants that associate with viral DNA load also associate
with the traits with which viral DNA load associates in populations 53.
Whereas most viral DNA load–phenotype associations are likely to be
a consequence of pathology, treatment, or environmental exposures
(such as smoking) leading to increased viral DNA presence in blood,
the finding that the alleles that increase risk for viral DNA load also
consistently confer risk for disease offers evidence that viral DNA
load is causally upstream.
T o use this approach to assess the potential effect of EBV DNA load
on autoimmune diseases and blood cancers that are epidemiologically
associated with EBV infection2, we analysed GWAS summary statistics
from a meta-analysis of FinnGen54, UKB55 and the Million Veteran Pro-
gram56 using four Mendelian randomization methods, excluding the
MHC region to guard against pleiotropy from linkage disequilibrium53
(Supplementary Table 15). For multiple sclerosis, for which prior EBV
infection is a large risk factor7, these analyses indicated that latent
viral DNA load after primary infection is unlikely to further influence
the risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MR–Egger P  = 0.52; Fig. 5d
and Extended Data Fig. 12e), despite UKB participants with multiple
sclerosis having higher EBV DNA load (P = 0.005). For systemic lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, which also associated with
higher EBV DNA load in UKB (P = 4.6 × 10−7  and 2.2 × 10−23 , respectively),
Mendelian randomization analyses were inconclusive about causality
(Extended Data Fig. 12f,g).
By contrast, all analyses (across the 4 Mendelian randomization
methods) suggested that viral DNA load after EBV infection significantly
influences the development of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (P = 1.2 × 10−3
to 0.014; Fig.  5e,f and Supplementary Table 15). Effect estimates
for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and
lymphoid leukaemia were smaller and not consistently significant
across Mendelian randomization approaches, suggesting specificity
for Hodgkin’s lymphoma (Extended Data Fig. 12h–j). Moreover, EBV
DNA abundance in people without Hodgkin’s lymphoma at the time
of blood draw for WGS was quantitatively predictive of their likeli -
hood to go on to develop Hodgkin’s lymphoma (OR = 2.01 [1.40, 2.84]
for incident Hodgkin’s lymphoma among EBV DNA-positive versus
DNA-negative individuals; Fig. 5g). Increased EBV viral DNA load in
blood—which could reflect a higher proportion of latently infected
B cells—may increase the opportunities for oncogenic transformation
leading to Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Discussion
Here, by profiling common DNA viruses in blood and saliva in popula-
tion sequencing data, we have characterized the major factors that
are likely to shape these constituents of the human virome. Human
genetics, age, sex, time of day, month of the year and smoking behaviour
consistently associate strongly with viral DNA load across many viruses,
but the relative magnitudes and even directions of these effects are
often virus-specific. These results on common, latent viruses, made
possible by cross-sectional analyses across over 900,000 biobank
participants, complement previous insights from targeted studies
of highly pathogenic viruses. These results also corroborate parallel
studies of EBV in UKB and AoU57– 59; here, we extended these analyses to
30 other viruses, and for EBV, we also observed interactions of genetic
effects with biosample type and with EBV genetic variation.
The largely distinct, polygenic human genetic effects that we
observed for DNA load of several common viruses (EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7,
MCPyV and anelloviruses) expand on earlier work identifying key loci
influencing control of HIV16,17 and hepatitis C18,48 load. The MHC region
contributed the strongest genetic effects for each virus that we studied
except HHV-6B, similar to other GWAS of infectious disease pheno-
types60, but the specific HLA alleles that influenced viral DNA load
varied across viruses (Supplementary Table 8). These virus-specific
effects at the MHC locus probably contribute to the prominent vari-
ation of viral DNA load that we observed across genetic ancestries,
which is likely to reflect the balancing selection that has shaped human
genetic variation affecting the immune system; alleles that confer an
advantage against a particular virus may increase susceptibility to
other pathogens61. Beyond the MHC, polygenic influences on DNA load
of different viruses were likewise largely distinct, sometimes surpris-
ingly so: for example, variation at MX2 and PML, which encode host
factors thought to be broadly restrictive against herpesviruses39,40,
Nature | www.nature.com | 9
a b
c
d e
f g
Pack years of smoking
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Never
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
0
5
10
15
20
25 EBV P = 3.3 × 10–195
HHV-7 P = 9.6 × 10–22
Cigarettes smoked per day
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Never
Former
1 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
EBV P = 3.3 × 10–563
HHV-7 P = 2.7 × 10–9
Multiple sclerosis
Odds ratio for s.d. increase in
EBV reads
Method
0.0625
0.25 0.0625
0.25
1 2 4 8 16 64
Weighted
median
IVW
MR–Egger
ConMix
Hodgkin's lymphoma
Odds ratio for s.d. increase in
EBV reads
Method
1 2 4 8 16 64
Weighted
median
IVW
MR–Egger
ConMix
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Effect size on EBV DNA load (s.d. units)
Hodgkin’s lymphoma odds ratio
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0
5
10
15
EBV read pairs
Rate of incident Hodgkin's lymphoma
during follow-up (per 10,000)
0 1 2 ≥3
Odds ratio
0.8 1 2 5 10
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco (F17)
Unspeci/f_ied HIV disease (B24)
Other rheumatoid arthritis (M06)
Depressive episode (F32)
Other peripheral vascular diseases (I73)
Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (J44)
Varicella (chickenpox) (B01)
Transplanted organ and tissue status (Z94)
Other and unspeci/f_ied types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (C85)
Other anaemias (D64)
Agranulocytosis (D70)
Unspeci/f_ied renal failure (N19)
Transplanted organ and tissue status (Z94)
Other and unspeci/f_ied types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (C85)
Unspeci/f_ied diabetes mellitus (E14)
Chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25)
Chronic renal failure (N18)
Presence of cardiac and vascular implants and grafts (Z95)
Abnormalities of breathing (R06)
Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (E11)
Unspeci/f_ied renal failure (N19)
Angina pectoris (I20)
EBV
HHV7
TTV (VT416)
TTV (TUS01)
TTV (HD14a)
Fig. 5 | Associations of viral DNA load with clinical phenotypes and smoking.
a, Associations of clinical conditions with detectable virus (presence of viral
DNA sequences in blood WGS) in UKB participants with European ancestry
(n = 453,770). Several of the strongest independent associations are shown;
the full set of associations is provided in Supplementary Tables 10 and 11.
b, Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity (green) and HHV-7 positivity (blue)
by smoking pack-years in UKB (n = 379,233 participants with European ancestry).
Never smokers are also shown. c , Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity
(green) and HHV-7 positivity (blue) by cigarettes smoked per day in UKB
(n = 438,101 participants with European ancestry). Never smokers and former
smokers are also shown. d, Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load
(exposure; n = 638,825) on risk for multiple sclerosis (outcome; meta-analysis
of 7 ,907 cases and 1,474,810 controls) using different Mendelian randomization
approaches ( y axis) with 44 non-MHC loci as instrument variables. An estimate
is plotted in green if its 95% confidence interval does not overlap an odds ratio
of 1 (no effect). ConMix, contamination mixture; IVW, inverse-variance
weighted; MR, Mendelian randomization. e , Estimates of the causal effect of
EBV DNA load on risk for Hodgkin’s lymphoma (meta-analysis of 2,529 cases
and 1,159,394 controls). Mendelian randomization odds ratios are expected
to be overestimated due to measurement noise (Methods). f , Effect sizes for
44 common genetic variants (at distinct non-MHC loci)—used as instrument
variables in Mendelian randomization—for EBV DNA load ( x axis) and risk for
Hodgkin’s lymphoma ( y axis). The line shown is from the MR–Egger test; the
y intercept is not significantly different from OR = 1, indicating low pleiotropy
of the genetic instruments. g , Incidence rates of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (during
approximately 15 years of follow-up; n = 174 incident cases), stratified by the
number of EBV DNA fragments in UKB blood WGS data, for individuals without
a Hodgkin’s lymphoma diagnosis at the time of sample collection. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. P values by two-sided linear regression (b,c).
10 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
associated with DNA load of HHV-7 but not EBV. We also highlight the
utility of using pairs of related phenotypes, such as type 1 and type 2
EBV DNA load (Fig. 4) or EBV DNA load in blood and saliva (Extended
Data Fig. 9i,j), as a mechanism to accomplish fine-mapping of a complex
genetic association.
The large number of polygenic effects that we observed for EBV
DNA load—45 human genomic loci—enabled Mendelian randomiza-
tion to evaluate the causality of associations with clinical phenotypes
(Fig. 5). These analyses suggested that multiple sclerosis risk from
EBV infection may be mediated largely by adaptive immune response
to an EBV infection62, without an additional influence of subsequent
lifetime viral DNA load. By contrast, EBV DNA load appears to be a
causal risk factor for Hodgkin’s lymphoma. This result contrasts with
a Mendelian randomization analysis from a parallel study that did
not observe an effect of EBV DNA load on Hodgkin’s lymphoma 58;
this discrepancy might be explained by increased statistical power
here (from Hodgkin’s lymphoma GWAS summary statistics from a
2.6-fold larger meta-analysis, as well as more EBV DNA load GWAS
hits available as genetic instruments) and inclusion versus exclusion
of the MHC region. This result could potentially be validated in vitro
by exposing germinal centre B cells to increasing titres of EBV and
measuring the number of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells
produced63; alternatively, it could be studied in humanized mice 64
if HRS cell generation requires a tissue niche. An effect on Hodgkin’s
lymphoma is not unexpected given the risk of EBV-positive Hodgkin’s
lymphoma conferred by infectious mononucleosis 6, but it sug -
gests that interindividual differences in lifetime management of DNA
load affect health risks beyond infection itself. If so, interventions that
reduce EBV DNA load could potentially decrease the risk of Hodgkin’s
lymphoma. Notably, smoking has previously been found to be a risk
factor for EBV-positive Hodgkin’s lymphoma (OR = 1.81 [1.27−2.56]
for current smokers), but not for EBV-negative Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(OR = 1.02 [0.72–1.44]) 65 and more weakly for non-Hodgkin’s lym -
phoma (OR = 1.10 [1.00–1.20]) 66, suggesting that the effect of smoking
on EBV DNA load might be one mechanism that underlies Hodgkin’s
lymphoma subtype-specific risk. Similarly, antivirals such as acyclic
nucleoside analogues that inhibit herpesvirus DNA polymerases and
reduce EBV viral load in blood67 may be worth evaluation for potential
prophylactic benefit against Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Our analyses of human viruses that are commonly observable from
population DNA sequencing data had several limitations that will need
further efforts to resolve using analytical approaches that more com-
pletely capture viral genetic variation, additional cohorts of greater
scale, and samples obtained from a wider range of body sites (Supple-
mentary Note 10). We envision that biobank WGS data will continue to
be a powerful resource for virology and epidemiology, particularly in
geographic regions with a greater burden of certain DNA viruses such as
hepatitis B and retroviruses such as HIV and human T lymphotropic virus.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10288-y.
1. Liang, G. & Bushman, F. D. The human virome: assembly, composition and host interactions.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 514–527 (2021).
2. Damania, B., Kenney, S. C. & Raab-Traub, N. Epstein–Barr virus: biology and clinical disease.
Cell 185, 3652–3670 (2022).
3. Grebely, J. et al. Hepatitis C virus clearance, reinfection, and persistence, with insights from
studies of injecting drug users: towards a vaccine. Lancet Infect. Dis. 12, 408–414 (2012).
4. Khan, G., Miyashita, E. M., Yang, B., Babcock, G. J. & Thorley-Lawson, D. A. Is EBV
persistence in vivo a model for B cell homeostasis? Immunity 5, 173–179 (1996).
5. Ho, D. D., Moudgil, T. & Alam, M. Quantitation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in
the blood of infected persons. N. Engl. J. Med. 321, 1621–1625 (1989).
6. Hjalgrim, H. et al. Characteristics of Hodgkin’s lymphoma after infectious mononucleosis.
N. Engl. J. Med. 349, 1324–1332 (2003).
7. Bjornevik, K. et al. Longitudinal analysis reveals high prevalence of Epstein–Barr virus
associated with multiple sclerosis. Science 375, 296–301 (2022).
8. Robinson, W. H., Younis, S., Love, Z. Z., Steinman, L. & Lanz, T. V. Epstein–Barr virus as a
potentiator of autoimmune diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 20, 729–740 (2024).
9. Moustafa, A. et al. The blood DNA virome in 8,000 humans. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006292
(2017).
10. Liu, S. et al. Genomic analyses from non-invasive prenatal testing reveal genetic
associations, patterns of viral infections, and Chinese population history. Cell 175,
347–359.e14 (2018).
11. Koonin, E. V., Dolja, V. V. & Krupovic, M. The healthy human virome: from virus–host
symbiosis to disease. Curr. Opin. Virol. 47, 86–94 (2021).
12. Gulley, M. L. & Tang, W. Laboratory assays for Epstein–Barr virus-related disease. J. Mol.
Diagn. 10, 279–292 (2008).
13. Saag, M. S. et al. HIV viral load markers in clinical practice. Nat. Med. 2, 625–629 (1996).
14. Focosi, D. et al. Assessment of prevalence and load of torquetenovirus viraemia in a large
cohort of healthy blood donors. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 26, 1406–1410 (2020).
15. Chen, C.-J. et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological gradient of serum
hepatitis B virus DNA level. JAMA 295, 65–73 (2006).
16. Fellay, J. et al. A whole-genome association study of major determinants for host control
of HIV-1. Science 317, 944 (2007).
17. McLaren, P. J. et al. Polymorphisms of large effect explain the majority of the host genetic
contribution to variation of HIV-1 virus load. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 14658–14663
(2015).
18. Ge, D. et al. Genetic variation in IL28B predicts hepatitis C treatment-induced viral
clearance. Nature 461, 399–401 (2009).
19. Kamatani, Y. et al. A genome-wide association study identifies variants in the HLA-DP
locus associated with chronic hepatitis B in Asians. Nat. Genet. 41, 591–595 (2009).
20. Thomas, D. L. et al. Genetic variation in IL28B and spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C
virus. Nature 461, 798–801 (2009).
21. Rubicz, R. et al. A genome-wide integrative genomic study localizes genetic factors
influencing antibodies against Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1). PLoS Genet.
9, e1003147 (2013).
22. Kachuri, L. et al. The landscape of host genetic factors involved in immune response to
common viral infections. Genome Med. 12, 93 (2020).
23. The UK Biobank Whole-Genome Sequencing Consortium. Whole-genome sequencing of
490,640 UK Biobank participants. Nature 645, 692–701 (2025).
24. Bick, A. G. et al. Genomic data in the All of Us Research Program. Nature 627, 340–346
(2024).
25. The SPARK Consortium SPARK: A US cohort of 50,000 families to accelerate autism
research. Neuron 97, 488–492 (2018).
26. Kanakry, J. A. et al. The clinical significance of EBV DNA in the plasma and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells of patients with or without EBV diseases. Blood 127, 2007–2017
(2016).
27. Chisaka, H., Morita, E., Yaegashi, N. & Sugamura, K. Parvovirus B19 and the pathogenesis
of anaemia. Rev. Med. Virol. 13, 347–359 (2003).
28. Flamand, L. et al. Endogenous human herpesviruses 6A/B. J. Virol. 0, e01054–25 (2025).
29. Liu, X. et al. Endogenization and excision of human herpesvirus 6 in human genomes.
PLoS Genet. 16, e1008915 (2020).
30. Spandole, S., Cimponeriu, D., Berca, L. M. & Mihăescu, G. Human anelloviruses: an
update of molecular, epidemiological and clinical aspects. Arch. Virol 160, 893–908
(2015).
31. Loyo, M. et al. Quantitative detection of Merkel cell virus in human tissues and possible
mode of transmission. Int. J. Cancer 126, 2991–2996 (2010).
32. Klein, S. L. & Flanagan, K. L. Sex differences in immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16,
626–638 (2016).
33. Bastiaanssen, T. F. S. et al. Kronos: a computational tool to facilitate biological rhythmicity
analysis. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.04.21.537503 (2023).
34. Li, Q. et al. Epstein–Barr virus uses HLA class II as a cofactor for infection of B lymphocytes.
J. Virol. 71, 4657–4662 (1997).
35. Saveanu, L. et al. IRAP identifies an endosomal compartment required for MHC class I
cross-presentation. Science 325, 213–217 (2009).
36. Stamogiannos, A., Koumantou, D., Papakyriakou, A. & Stratikos, E. Effects of polymorphic
variation on the mechanism of endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1. Mol. Immunol.
67, 426–435 (2015).
37. Andrés, A. M. et al. Balancing selection maintains a form of ERAP2 that undergoes
nonsense-mediated decay and affects antigen presentation. PLoS Genet. 6, e1001157
(2010).
38. Willis, T. G. & Dyer, M. J. S. The role of immunoglobulin translocations in the pathogenesis
of B-cell malignancies. Blood 96, 808–822 (2000).
39. Scherer, M. & Stamminger, T. Emerging role of PML nuclear bodies in innate immune
signaling. J. Virol. 90, 5850–5854 (2016).
40. Schilling, M. et al. Human MxB protein is a pan-herpesvirus restriction factor. J. Virol. 92,
e01056-18 (2018).
41. Verstrepen, L. et al. Expression, biological activities and mechanisms of action of A20
(TNFAIP3). Biochem. Pharmacol. 80, 2009–2020 (2010).
42. Tan, M. & Jiang, X. Norovirus and its histo-blood group antigen receptors: an answer to a
historical puzzle. Trends Microbiol. 13, 285–293 (2005).
43. Kubiniok, P. et al. Understanding the constitutive presentation of MHC class I
immunopeptidomes in primary tissues. iScience 25, 103768 (2022).
44. Hirayasu, K. & Arase, H. Functional and genetic diversity of leukocyte immunoglobulin-
like receptor and implication for disease associations. J. Hum. Genet. 60, 703–708
(2015).
45. Miller, L. H., Mason, S. J., Clyde, D. F. & McGinniss, M. H. The resistance factor to
Plasmodium vivax in blacks — the Duffy-blood-group genotype, FyFy. N. Engl. J. Med.
295, 302–304 (1976).
Nature | www.nature.com | 11
46. Reich, D. et al. Reduced neutrophil count in people of African descent is due to a
regulatory variant in the Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines gene. PLoS Genet. 5,
e1000360 (2009).
47. Sample, J. et al. Epstein–Barr virus types 1 and 2 differ in their EBNA-3A, EBNA-3B, and
EBNA-3C genes. J. Virol. 64, 4084–4092 (1990).
48. Ansari, M. A. et al. Genome-to-genome analysis highlights the effect of the human
innate and adaptive immune systems on the hepatitis C virus. Nat. Genet. 49, 666–673
(2017).
49. Zanella, L. et al. A reliable Epstein–Barr virus classification based on phylogenomic and
population analyses. Sci Rep. 9, 9829 (2019).
50. Zimber, U. et al. Geographical prevalence of two types of Epstein–Barr virus. Virology 154,
56–66 (1986).
51. Moss, D. J. et al. Cytotoxic T-cell clones discriminate between A- and B-type Epstein–Barr
virus transformants. Nature 331, 719–721 (1988).
52. Burrows, S. R., Sculley, T. B., Misko, I. S., Schmidt, C. & Moss, D. J. An Epstein–Barr virus-
specific cytotoxic T cell epitope in EBV nuclear antigen 3 (EBNA 3). J. Exp. Med. 171,
345–349 (1990).
53. Sanderson, E. et al. Mendelian randomization. Nat. Rev. Methods Primer 2, 6 (2022).
54. Kurki, M. I. et al. FinnGen provides genetic insights from a well-phenotyped isolated
population. Nature 613, 508–518 (2023).
55. Bycroft, C. et al. The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data.
Nature 562, 203–209 (2018).
56. Verma, A. et al. Diversity and scale: genetic architecture of 2068 traits in the VA Million
Veteran Program. Science 385, eadj1182 (2024).
57. Nyeo, S. S. et al. Population-scale sequencing resolves determinants of persistent EBV
DNA. Nature 650, 664–672 (2026).
58. Schmidt, A. et al. Host control of persistent Epstein–Barr virus infection. Nature https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10274-4 (2026).
59. Yasumizu, Y. et al. Host genetic architecture between Epstein–Barr virus activity and
multiple sclerosis reveals shared pathways. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.64898/
2025.12.11.25342083 (2025).
60. Kwok, A. J., Mentzer, A. & Knight, J. C. Host genetics and infectious disease: new tools,
insights and translational opportunities. Nat. Rev. Genet. 22, 137–153 (2021).
61. Barreiro, L. B. & Quintana-Murci, L. From evolutionary genetics to human immunology:
how selection shapes host defence genes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 17–30 (2010).
62. Lanz, T. V. et al. Clonally expanded B cells in multiple sclerosis bind EBV EBNA1 and
GlialCAM. Nature 603, 321–327 (2022).
63. Küppers, R. et al. Identification of Hodgkin and Reed–Sternberg cell-specific genes by
gene expression profiling. J. Clin. Invest. 111, 529–537 (2003).
64. Fujiwara, S., Imadome, K.-I. & Takei, M. Modeling EBV infection and pathogenesis in
new-generation humanized mice. Exp. Mol. Med. 47, e135 (2015).
65. Kamper-Jørgensen, M. et al. Cigarette smoking and risk of Hodgkin lymphoma and its
subtypes: a pooled analysis from the International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium
(InterLymph). Ann. Oncol. 24, 2245–2255 (2013).
66. Morton, L. M. et al. Cigarette smoking and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a pooled
analysis from the International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium (InterLymph). Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 14, 925–933 (2005).
67. Hoshino, Y. et al. Long-term administration of valacyclovir reduces the number of Epstein–
Barr virus (EBV)-infected B cells but not the number of EBV DNA copies per B cell in healthy
volunteers. J. Virol. 83, 11857–11861 (2009).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026
Article
Methods
Ethics
This research complies with all relevant ethical regulations. The study
protocol (NHSR-8429) was determined to be not human subject
research by the Broad Institute Office of Research Subject Protection
as all data analysed were previously collected and de-identified. Use of
SPARK data for this research was approved by SFARI (project 3350.2).
UK Biobank, All of Us, and SPARK WGS data
All WGS data analysed in this work were generated in previous studies.
For all cohorts, PCR-free methods were used in library preparation
and sequencing was done on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 machines. WGS
from UKB23 was performed on libraries prepared with NEBNext Ultra
II PCR-free kit (New England Biolabs) using blood-derived DNA from
490,401 individuals at the deCODE facility in Reykjavik, Iceland and the
Wellcome Sanger Institute (Sanger), Cambridge, UK. Sequencing reads
were aligned to human reference build GRCh38 graph genome with
Illumina DRAGEN Bio-IT Platform Germline Pipeline v.3.7.8. Samples
were sequenced to an average coverage of 32.5×.
WGS from the NIH All of Us v8 cohort24 was performed on blood and
saliva-derived DNA from 414,817 individuals (365,918 blood-derived
and 48,899 saliva-derived samples). Sequencing reads from librar-
ies prepared with PCR-Free Kapa HyperPrep library construction kit
were aligned to human reference build GRCh38 with Illumina DRAGEN
Bio-IT Platform Germline Pipeline v.3.4.12. Samples were sequenced
to an average coverage of 37.9×.
WGS from the SPARK cohort of the Simons Foundation Autism
Research Initiative (SFARI)25 was performed on saliva-derived DNA
from 12,519 individuals. Sequencing reads from libraries prepared
with Illumina DNA PCR-Free Library Prep kit were aligned to human
reference build GRCh38 with BWA-MEM by the New York Genome
Center (NYGC) using Centers for Common Disease Genomics project
standards. Samples were sequenced to an average coverage of 42×.
Details of saliva sample collection, DNA extraction, and sequencing
were described in ref. 68 (which analysed data from sequencing waves
WGS1–3 of the SPARK integrated WGS (iWGS) v.1.1 dataset; here we
analysed WGS1–5, which included additional samples included in sub-
sequent sequencing waves).
Genotypes of genome-wide human genetic variants (SNPs and
insertion–deletions) were previously generated for all three data -
sets. For UKB, we analysed genotypes previously imputed into UKB
SNP-array data55 using the TOPMed reference panel69 (as the final UKB
WGS genotype call set was not available at the time of analysis). For AoU
and SPARK, we analysed genotypes previously called from WGS using
DRAGEN (AoU24) and DeepVariant (SPARK25).
Selection of viral reference genomes
We selected a panel of 31 viruses for which to profile viral DNA load (Sup-
plementary Table 1) based on previous work that identified the most
prevalent viruses observed in blood-derived DNA sequencing data from
8,240 individuals9. Additional viral reference genomes were included
to more comprehensively represent viral families previously observed.
For example, adenovirus was represented by Human adenovirus type
7 and human adenovirus E (type 4) reference genomes, as these are
two of the most commonly observed in adults70, and polyomavirus
was represented by a set of common types (1/BK, 2/JC, 3/KI, 4/WU, 5/
MC, 6, 7)71,72. Undetected herpesviruses (HSV-2 and VZV) were added
given the high general prevalence of EBV and HHV-7. T o maximize rep-
resentation of the diversity of anellovirus genomes while limiting the
size of the viral reference panel, we selected a representative from each
of the five recently described anellovirus clades with available NCBI
reference genomes73 (Extended Data Fig. 1a).
The rationale for prioritizing a smaller set of viruses to profile (rather
than attempting to comprehensively characterize viral diversity) was
that our main goal was to identify effects of human genetics, age, sex
and environmental exposures (such as smoking) on viral DNA load,
and we only had statistical power to detect such effects for commonly
observed viruses. Working with a smaller set of common viruses
allowed us to perform careful QC on WGS-based quantifications of viral
DNA load, which was important given the potential for read alignment
artefacts.
Measurement of viral DNA presence and abundance in WGS
samples
In the UKB (blood), AoU (blood and saliva) and SPARK (saliva) WGS
datasets, we first extracted unmapped reads (that is, reads that did not
align to the GRCh38 human reference genome) and reads that aligned
to the chrEBV decoy contig. We realigned these reads to the reference
panel of 31 viral genomes (merged into a single reference for align-
ment) using BWA-MEM74 (v.0.7.18) with 4 threads (-t 4). We took this
read-mapping-based approach following Moustafa et al.9, who observed
minimal additional detection of viral sequences from blood-derived
WGS upon using de novo assembly followed by protein-based search.
After realignment, each virus’ genome was then scanned to identify
regions with excessive numbers of alignments suggestive of accumu-
lated misalignments originating from some other source of DNA (for
example, mismapped human DNA) by first computing alignment cov-
erage aggregated across all samples in each dataset (UKB, AoU blood,
AoU saliva and SPARK, each analysed separately). T o do so, for each
sample, we used mosdepth75 (v.0.3.9) to compute depth-of-coverage
in each 500-bp window of each viral reference genome (--by 500); we
skipped per-base depth output (-n) and mate overlap/CIGAR corrections
(--fast-mode), restricted to reads passing default filters on SAM flags
(-F 1796, which excludes duplicate reads), and filtered to reads with
mapping quality ≥5 (-Q 5) for which their mates mapped to the same
reference genome with an insert size in the range 100–1,000 bp (-l 100
-u 1000). The results of these filters were not sensitive to the choice of
the mapping quality threshold; using a more stringent threshold (-Q 20)
affected only a few percent of reads attributed to common viruses and
had a negligible effect on downstream genetic association analyses.
Upon computing the 500 bp-resolution coverage profile of each
viral genome of each sample, we computed the coverage profile of
each virus (that is, for each 500-bp bin, what fraction of samples had
non-zero coverage) within each cohort (UKB, AoU blood, AoU saliva
and SPARK). For each virus, for each cohort, we flagged a subset of
500-bp regions for exclusion based on having coverage exceeding
the following threshold:
QQ Q4× (− )+ +531 3
where Q1 and Q3 are the first and third quartiles, respectively, of the dis-
tribution of alignment coverage across all 500 bp regions of that virus’
genome in that cohort. This expression corresponds to a lenient ‘Tukey
fence’ , which is an outlier removal boundary defined based on adding
a multiple of the interquartile range (Q3–Q 1) to the third quartile (Q3).
We used a lenient Tukey fence to retain regions with modest elevation
of coverage (as such regions may still have a majority of alignments
derived from the viral genome), and we added a constant offset of 5 to
handle situations in which the first and third quartiles have the same
value. Applying this bin-level filtering strategy per virus per cohort
helped handle cohort-specific error modes of false positive viral align-
ments that might arise from heterogeneity in WGS data generation
and processing (for example, details of how reads had previously been
aligned to the human reference genome, which impacted which reads
did and did not map to human chromosomes).
For association analyses of viral DNA load with biological and clinical
phenotypes, these measures of viral DNA load were then converted into
binary ‘viral DNA positivity’ indicators of presence or absence of reads
from a given virus in each individual. For genetic association analyses
of viral DNA load in blood, the number of viral read pairs mapping to
each genome (obtained by summing mosdepth 500-bp bin depth
values across non-excluded bins and multiplying by 500/300 = (bin
size)/(bases per read pair)) was inverse-normal transformed to capture
quantitative information about viral abundance while limiting the
influence of outlier samples. In saliva samples, in which viral reads
were often much more abundant, two phenotypes were generated for
genetic association analyses: viral DNA positivity (binary presence or
absence of reads), and a quantitative abundance metric in which we
applied inverse-normal transform to non-zero values (that is, masking
individuals with no reads from a given virus) after normalizing read
pair counts for library size. This allowed for the possibility of observ-
ing effects on viral prevalence but not abundance and vice versa. For
associations with sex (Fig. 2c,d), the cohort used for analysis (UKB
or AoU for blood; AoU or SPARK for saliva) was chosen to maximize
prevalence and/or representation of an age range with a larger sex dif-
ference; for SPARK, which used a family design, analyses of sex effects
were restricted to parents.
Estimation of the number of EBV-derived reads expected to be
present in blood WGS
T o assess the reasonableness of the distribution of viral read counts
observed in blood WGS (typically 0 or 1 read pair per sample, even
for near-ubiquitous herpesviruses; Fig.  1b), we roughly estimated
the number of EBV-derived reads expected per WGS sample as follows.
On average, EBV is present in 1 out of 100,000 B cells4 with roughly 100
episomes per infected cell67. Assuming B cells comprise roughly 5%
of all white blood cells76 yields an expected 5 × 10−5  EBV genomes per
white blood cell, or 2.5 × 10−5  EBV genomes per haploid human genome
in blood-derived WGS. The EBV reference genome is 171,823 bp, so
WGS at 30x coverage of the human genome by 2x150bp read pairs
should produce an expected 0.4 read pairs from the EBV genome per
sample.
Association of viral DNA prevalence with sample collection time
Collection time for blood samples in UKB was obtained from field 3166.
For analyses of collection time for saliva-derived WGS in the AoU cohort,
we excluded a large fraction of samples (62%) that we determined were
likely to have been mailed; for such samples, recorded collection times
corresponded to receipt of samples rather than time of saliva sampling.
Specifically, samples were excluded if they lacked an in-person physi-
cal measurement for heart rate or had a heart rate measurement time
separated by more than a day from WGS sample collection time. The
recorded collection times for the 18,751 remaining samples were con-
verted from UTC to local time by taking the modal time zone of the state
containing the three-digit zip code for the corresponding individual.
P values for hour-of-day and month-of-year associations (Fig. 2e,f and
Extended Data Fig. 3k–n) were calculated with ANOVA by comparing
models with and without hour of the day or month of the year. Both hour
of the day and month of the year were encoded as a series of indicator
variables to allow for non-linear relationships with viral prevalence.
All models included age, age squared, sex, assessment centre, and
top genetic principal components as covariates (20 principal compo-
nents for UKB; 16 principal components for AoU). Associations were
confirmed with Kronos (v.1.0.0), which was run with default settings;
to handle covariates, viral phenotypes were first adjusted for covariate
effects estimated using harmonic regression.
Association of viral DNA prevalence with genetic ancestry
For UKB, genetically inferred ancestry was determined as described
previously77. In brief, 20 genome-wide ancestry principal components
were used to identify groups of individuals within a Euclidean distance
radius from the centre of individuals within each self-reported ethnicity
category, with the distance threshold chosen to include a large fraction
of individuals in that self-reported ethnicity category.
For AoU participants, previously generated genetically inferred
ancestry24 and ancestry admixture estimates from Rye78 were used.
For SPARK participants, genetic ancestry was inferred using Euclid-
ean distance on 10 genome-wide ancestry principal components to clus-
ter centres determined from the subset of individuals who self-reported
race. For each ancestry group, a cluster centre was chosen to have the
median principal component coordinate for each principal compo-
nent among individuals who self-reported a corresponding race. As
in UKB, all individuals that fell within a Euclidean distance radius that
enclosed a large majority of individuals self-reporting that race were
then assigned to that genetically inferred ancestry. For European ances-
try, the radius was set to include 90% of individuals who self-reported
as ‘white’ (n = 8,157). For African ancestry, the radius was set to include
90% of individuals who self-reported as ‘ African American’ (n = 345).
For American ancestry, the radius was set to include 75% of individu-
als who self-reported as ‘Hispanic’ or ‘Native American’ (n = 906). For
East Asian ancestry, the radius was set to include 75% of individuals
who self-reported as ‘ Asian’ and were separated from the majority of
samples on PC2 (n = 342). For South Asian ancestry, the radius was
set to include 75% of individuals who self-reported as ‘ Asian’ and were
separated from the majority of samples on PC4 (n = 144).
HLA allele imputation in UK Biobank
The T1DGC reference panel for HLA allele imputation79 (n = 5,225) was
first converted to VCF format with variants lifted over to hg19 and
merged into multiallelic sites where appropriate. A small number of
individuals (n = 136) with >2 alleles for at least one multiallelic site were
excluded from the reference panel. Imputation of HLA alleles onto
phased SNP-array haplotypes80 was done with BEAGLE81 (v.5.4) using
default parameters, after which imputed alleles were converted back to
biallelic variants for genetic association analysis and lifted over to hg38.
Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
phenotypes in UK Biobank
Abundances of reads aligning to reference genomes for EBV, HHV-6B,
HHV-7 and anellovirus strains TUS01, VT416 and HD14a were
inverse-normal transformed into quantitative phenotypes for GWAS.
Individuals were excluded based on the following criteria: not having
European genetic ancestry, not having available TOPMed-imputed
genotypes (including for chromosome X), and/or having withdrawn,
leaving 453,770 individuals for genetic association analyses (447,190
for HHV-6B after removal of individuals with endogenous HHV-6
integration). TOPMed-imputed variants for these individuals were
filtered to require minor allele frequency >0.001 and INFO > 0.3. Lin-
ear mixed model association tests were performed with BOL T-LMM82
(v.2.5) to account for relatedness, using the following covariates: age,
age squared, sex, genotype array, assessment centre and 20 genetic
principal components. SNP array genotypes were used for model fit-
ting, and linkage disequilibrium scores derived from European-ancestry
1KGP samples were used for test statistic calibration. GWAS of
germline-inherited endogenous HHV-6A and HHV-6B carrier status
were performed using linear regression with the same covariates in
individuals of European genetic ancestry, excluding one from each
pair of relatives with second-degree or closer relatedness83.
T o identify index variants outside the MHC region (Supplementary
Table 7), we first iteratively selected the strongest association and
removed any variants within 1 Mb. Index variant pairs within 3 Mb were
then evaluated to determine whether they represented independent
associations using the following approximation of the association
strength of the index variant i conditional on the more strongly associ-
ated index variant j:
χχ rβ β
χ
χ≈1 −s ign( )ij i ij ij
j
i
|
22
2
2
2








Article
as previously described84. The less-strongly associated variant i was
dropped if its approximate conditional association was no longer
genome-wide significant (P < 5 × 10−8 ). Identified index variants were
annotated with nearby genes using GENCODE 39 (ref. 85) definitions for
protein-coding genes, long non-coding RNAs, and microRNAs. Index
variants were annotated as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs)
and splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTLs) using the v.10 release of
GTEx86. Follow-up genetic association analyses of variants in the MHC
region including both TOPMed-imputed variants and imputed HLA
alleles were performed using linear regression with BOL T-LMM on
unrelated individuals with European ancestry with the same covariates
(Supplementary Table 8).
Partitioning of heritability between MHC and non-MHC
variation
T o partition heritability between common variants within and out-
side the MHC region of the human genome, BOL T-REML87 (v.2.5) was
run on SNP-array genotypes for unrelated UKB participants with
European ancestry with variants within the range chr. 6:24000000
to chr. 6:35000000 assigned to one component (MHC region) and all
other variants assigned to a second component, with the --remlNoRefine
option set. Age, age squared, sex, assessment centre, genotyping array,
and the top 20 genetic ancestry principal components were included
as covariates.
Rare variant association analyses in UK Biobank
Gene-level burden masks were generated as previously described 88
using genotypes of rare protein-coding variants in the UKB DRAGEN
WGS dataset and genotypes of copy number variants previously ascer-
tained from UKB whole-exome sequencing data89. The specific burden
masks analysed here for association with viral DNA load used a minor
allele frequency threshold of MAF < 0.001 and included missense
variants with PrimateAI-3D90 scores >0.7 merged with loss-of-function
SNPs, insertion–deletions and copy number variants, using only
the MANE Select transcript 91. Association tests were performed
using linear regression (implemented in BOL T-LMM) on unrelated
European-ancestry individuals with age, age squared, sex, assessment
centre, genotyping array and the 20 genetic principal components
included as covariates. Genes in the MHC region (chr. 6:24000000
to chr. 6:35000000) were excluded given the potential for linkage
disequilibrium with strong common-variant associations, leaving
17,589 gene burden masks and a Bonferroni threshold of 5.7 × 10−7
(adjusting for five viruses included in these analyses: EBV, HHV-7
and 3 TTVs).
Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
phenotypes in All of Us
GWAS was performed on AoU participants with European ancestry for
the following phenotypes: inverse-normal transformed EBV, HHV-6B,
HHV-7 and anellovirus strains TUS01, VT416 and HD14a abundances
in blood WGS (n = 201,168 for EBV, 198,059 for HHV-6B, and 200,091
for other viruses), EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7 and MCPyV DNA positivity
(that is, presence of any EBV reads) in saliva WGS (n = 33,164 for EBV,
32,711 for HHV-6B, and 33,050 for other viruses), and inverse-normal
transformed EBV (n = 16,282) and HHV-7 (n = 29,989) abundances in
DNA-positive saliva WGS samples. Variants from the allele count/allele
frequency (ACAF) threshold call set present in the TOPMed-r2 impu-
tation panel (to exclude those in regions of poor mappability) were
filtered to those with minor allele frequency >0.1% and allele count ≥40
in the subset of European ancestry samples used. BOL T-LMM was run
with SNP-array genotypes (minor allele frequency >1%, missingness
<10% in European-ancestry samples) as model SNPs, with the follow-
ing covariates: age, age squared, sex, sequencing site, and 16 genetic
principal components. For EBV GWAS, samples without a sex call of XX
or XY were assigned indicator variables, whereas they were excluded
from GWAS for other viruses due to a minor change in the analytical
pipeline during the course of the project.
GWAS was also performed on AoU participants with African ancestry
for inverse normal transformed EBV and HHV-7 abundances in blood
WGS (n = 77,573). Variants from the ACAF threshold call set with minor
allele frequency >0.5% in gnomAD v.4.1 African-ancestry samples were
filtered to those with minor allele frequency >0.1% and allele count ≥40
in the subset of African-ancestry samples used. BOL T-LMM (using the
--lmmInfOnly flag, as the non-infinitesimal mixed model provided a neg-
ligible increase in statistical power) was run with SNP-array genotypes
(minor allele frequency >1%, missingness <10% in African-ancestry sam-
ples) as model SNPs, with the following covariates: age, age squared,
sex, sequencing site and 16 genetic principal components.
Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
phenotypes in SPARK
As an auxiliary analysis, we also performed GWAS of viral DNA load
phenotypes from SPARK saliva WGS. Abundances of reads aligning to
reference genomes for HHV-7, HHV-6B, and Merkel cell polyomavirus
were transformed into up to two GWAS phenotypes for each virus: a
binary phenotype encoding the presence/absence of any viral reads
(HHV-6B, n = 9,081 after sample exclusions; MCPyV, n = 9,209) and
a quantitative phenotype comprising inverse normal transformed
non-zero values (HHV-6B, n = 6,258; HHV-7, n = 7,360). Individuals with
non-European genetic ancestry were excluded using a more permis-
sive ancestry definition based on genomic PC1 and PC2 to maximize
power, leaving 9,209 individuals for genetic association analyses. For
HHV-6B, carriers of eHHV-6B were also excluded. Variants called by
DeepVariant were filtered and used to generate ancestry principal
components as previously described83. Linear mixed model associa-
tion tests were performed using BOL T-LMM to account for relatedness,
using the following covariates: age, square root of age, age squared,
sex, sequencing batch, percentage of mapped reads and ten genetic
principal components.
We observed that GWAS power in SPARK saliva WGS was much lower
than in AoU saliva WGS, as expected given the much smaller sample
size. We therefore chose not to meta-analyse saliva viral DNA load GWAS
results across AoU and SPARK because the potential power gain was
modest (given the much smaller size of the SPARK cohort) and might
be negated by the age heterogeneity of SPARK (mostly children) versus
AoU (only adults).
Meta-analysis of GWAS results from UK Biobank and All of Us
Associations with EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7 and anellovirus strains TUS01,
VT416, and HD14a DNA load in blood in AoU were meta-analysed with
those from UKB using METAL92 (v.2020-05-05) in standard error mode
(SCHEME STDERR), restricting to variants with minor allele frequency
greater than 0.1% (for EBV and HHV-7) or 1% (for HHV-6B and anellovi-
ruses) in both cohorts (ADDFIL TER MAF > 0.001 or 0.01), and applying
genomic control correction within input studies (GENOMICCONTROL
ON). One significantly associated locus in UKB that disagreed in direc-
tion of effect between cohorts (and between EBV presence phenotypes
generated from left and right halves of the EBV genome; Supplementary
Note 5) was filtered.
T o compute genetic correlation between viral phenotypes in UKB,
AoU, and SPARK, LDSC93 (v.2.0.0) was run with standard settings and
pairs of viral summary statistics as input.
Generation of lymphocyte percentage phenotype in All of Us
A lymphocyte percentage phenotype was generated from the ‘Lym-
phocytes/100 leukocytes in blood by automated count’ phenotype
(OMOP Concept Id: 3037511). Only entries with ‘percent’ , ‘percent of
white blood cells’ , ‘percent’ and ‘percentage unit’ as units were kept,
discarding entries with other or missing units as well as values outside
the range [0,100]. For individuals with multiple valid measurements,
we took the median value. This left 170,196 people with lymphocyte
percentage values, among whom 24,789 individuals with with African
ancestry had blood-derived WGS available and were used to evaluate
the extent to which the Duffy-null effects on EBV and HHV-7 DNA load
were mediated by effects on lymphocyte percentage.
Measurement of EBV type 1- and type 2-specific alignments
In both UKB and SPARK, unmapped reads and reads that aligned to the
chrEBV decoy contig were realigned to the EBV type 1 (NC_007605.1)
and EBV type 2 (NC_009334.1) reference genomes using BWA-MEM
(providing both reference genomes simultaneously and using 4 com-
putational threads). Read alignments were filtered to those for which
both the read and its mate were mapped (samtools view -F 12) and were
then collated within 500 bp bins of each of the two reference genomes
using mosdepth with the same parameters as above, with the exception
that the filter on insert size (-l 100 -u 1000) was dropped, as insert size
was undefined in situations in which a read mapped to EBV type 1 and
its mate to EBV type 2 or vice versa (for example, if only one read in the
pair fell within a type-informative region, and its non-type-informative
mate was mapped arbitrarily to type 1 or type 2). A 1 kb offset was added
to alignment bin coordinates in the type 1 genome starting at position
85000 to account for differences between the two reference genomes
in the EBNA3A–EBNA3C region. Alignments to 500 bp bins within the
viral genomic regions 35501–38000 and 79001–92500 (corresponding
to EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C) were considered to be type-specific,
and the numbers of type 1-specific and type 2-specific reads for each
sample were computed by summing 500 bp depths across these regions
(separately for the two EBV genomes), multiplying by 500/150 = (bin
size)/(bases per read), and rounding to the nearest integer. In UKB,
samples with at least two type 1-specific reads were designated as posi-
tive for EBV type 1, and analogously for type 2.
T o evaluate the risk of misclassification between type 1 and type 2,
we examined the distribution of type 2 versus type 1 reads in SPARK
saliva samples, making use of the fact that saliva samples frequently
have hundreds of EBV reads that should typically come from only
one EBV type (depending on whether the individual is infected with a
type 1 or type 2 EBV strain). This analysis showed that as expected,
nearly all samples had read counts heavily skewed to either type 1 or
type 2 (typically >99% type 1 or >99% type 2), indicating a low rate of
misclassification of reads.
Variation in EBV type 1 versus type 2 frequency by birthplace of
UK Biobank participants
For analyses of individuals born in the UK, geographic boundaries for
nine regions in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland were
obtained as a GeoJSON file corresponding to ‘NUTS, level 1 ( January
2018) Boundaries UK BFC’ (for EBV type analyses) or ‘NUTS, level 2
( January 2018) Boundaries UK BFC’ (for total EBV analyses) from the
Open Geography portal from the Office for National Statistics (ONS)
(https://geoportal.statistics.gov.uk). Birth coordinates for individuals
born in the UK (fields 129 and 130) were assigned to regions with these
boundaries using the R package sf (v.1.0-20), and the proportion of
participants positive for EBV type 2 (among EBV-positive individuals)
was estimated as the ratio of the number of samples determined to be
EBV type 2-positive to the total number of samples determined to be
either EBV type 1-positive or type 2-positive. For country-level analyses,
fields 1647 and 20115 were used.
Genetic association analyses of MHC variants with EBV-type
DNA load phenotypes
Variants in the MHC region of the human genome (including imputed
HLA alleles) were tested for association with three binary EBV DNA load
phenotypes derived from EBV type-specific read alignments. The first
two phenotypes coded EBV type 1-positive individuals (respectively,
type 2-positive individuals) as cases and all other individuals as controls.
The third phenotype, used in case-case association analyses of EBV
type 1 versus type 2 positivity, coded individuals who were type
2-positive and lacked type 1-specific alignments as cases (n = 1,366),
and those who were type 1-positive and lacked type 2-specific align-
ments as controls (n  = 9,817); a small number of individuals deter-
mined to be positive for both type 1 and type 2 were excluded (n = 126).
Association tests were performed using linear regression (implemented
in BOL T-LMM) on unrelated individuals with European ancestry with
age, age squared, sex, genotype array, assessment centre and 20 genetic
principal components as covariates.
Association analyses of viral DNA load with biological and
clinical phenotypes in UK Biobank
Binarized viral DNA positivity phenotypes were tested for association
with binary disease phenotypes in ICD-10 categories derived from
UKB ‘first occurrence’ data fields (fields under category 1712, which
merged data from electronic health records and self-report) and cancer
registry data (field 40006). For each virus, we tested only binary dis-
ease phenotypes for which at least 5 cases were expected among viral
DNA-positive individuals for that virus (comprising 493–1,413 tests for
each of eight common viruses tested: EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7, three TTVs
and eHHV-6A and eHHV-6B). Bonferroni correction was applied to the
full set of tests performed across all eight viruses. Association tests
were performed using logistic regression with Firth correction using
the Wald approximation (pl = FALSE) as implemented in the logistf
R package (v.1.26.0) on participants with European ancestry with age,
age squared, sex, assessment centre and the 20 genetic principal com-
ponents as covariates.
Viral DNA positivity phenotypes were also tested for association
with quantitative blood phenotypes in UKB: blood counts (category
100081), blood biochemistry (category 17518), and NMR metabolomics
(category 220). Association tests were performed using linear regres-
sion on individuals with European ancestry with the above covariates,
and Bonferroni correction was applied considering all pairwise tests of
quantitative blood phenotypes with viral DNA positivity phenotypes.
Binary immunosuppressive drug phenotypes were generated by
aggregating synonymous terms from self-reported medication data
(category 100075). Specifically, methotrexate was generated from the
union of individuals reporting ‘methotrexate’ or ‘mtx – methotrexate’;
cyclosporin from ‘cya - cyclosporin’ , ‘ciclosporin product’ , ‘csa - cyclo-
sporin a’ , ‘cya - cyclosporin a’ , ‘cyclosporin’ , ‘cyclosporin product’ or
‘ciclosporin’; and corticosteroids from ‘prednisone’ , ‘prednisolone’ ,
‘methylprednisolone’ , ‘prednisolone product’ , ‘dexamethasone’ ,
‘fludrocortisone’ , ‘hydrocortisone’ , ‘cortisone product’ , ‘hydrocorti-
sone product’ or ‘cortisone’ .
Quantitative smoking phenotypes in UKB were generated from the
pack-years and cigarettes per day phenotypes by encoding never smok-
ers (and, for cigarettes per day, former smokers) as 0 values. These
smoking phenotypes were tested for association with viral DNA positiv-
ity phenotypes using linear regression on individuals with European
ancestry with the above covariates.
Mendelian randomization to identify causal effects of EBV DNA
load on disease
Instrument variables for Mendelian randomization analyses were identi-
fied as the 44 lead variants at non-MHC loci from the GWAS meta-analysis
of EBV DNA load in UKB and AoU. The MHC region was excluded from
Mendelian randomization analyses given the likelihood of linkage dis-
equilibrium generating pleiotropic effects of MHC haplotypes on many
immune-related phenotypes. T o minimize the impact of sample overlap
between cohorts used in the exposure GWAS (EBV DNA load in UKB+AoU
blood WGS) and outcome GWAS (disease phenotypes in FinnGen plus
UKB plus MVP), we regenerated GWAS summary statistics for EBV DNA
load in UKB after restricting to a control-only sub-cohort94. Specifi-
cally, we reran BOL T-LMM after removing UKB participants with the
Article
following ICD-10 phenotypes: G35, C81, C82, C83, C84, C85, C91, M05,
M06 and M32. GWAS results from this control-only UKB sub-cohort were
then meta-analysed with AoU associations to generate effect sizes and
standard errors for use in Mendelian randomization.
GWAS summary statistics for outcome phenotypes of interest were
downloaded from https://mvp-ukbb.finngen.fi/ after applying for
access. In these GWAS, FinnGen phenotypes had been harmonized
over ICD-8, ICD-9 and ICD-10, cancer-specific ICD-O-3, (NOMESCO)
procedure codes, Finnish-specific Social Insurance Institute (KELA)
drug reimbursement codes and ATC-codes collected from various
registries. MVP phenotypes had been defined by ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes
from electronic health records grouped into corresponding phecodes,
with case status defined as having two or more phecode-mapped ICD-9
or ICD-10 codes. Meta-analyses had been performed by identifying phe-
notypes with concordant endpoints, as described at https://finngen.
gitbook.io/documentation/methods/meta-analysis. We used the
MendelianRandomization R package95 (v.0.10.0) with default settings
to generate estimates of causal effect sizes of EBV DNA load on disease
phenotypes using the weighted median, inverse-variance weighted
(IVW), MR–Egger, and contamination mixture (ConMix) approaches.
For weighted median, IVW, and MR–Egger, robust regression with penal-
ized weights was used to account for invalid instrument variables96.
We caution that effect size estimates from Mendelian randomization
(here, the increase in log-odds of disease per s.d. increase in EBV reads;
Fig. 5e) are expected to be overestimated when the exposure variable
(here, EBV DNA load) is measured with high noise. For example, were
the exposure phenotype to be randomly permuted in a subset of sam-
ples, this would leave the s.d. of the exposure unchanged, but it would
shrink down the effect sizes (betas) of the instrumental variables. The
betas of instrument variables are used as independent variables in the
regression analysis used to estimate Mendelian randomization effect
sizes (x axis of Fig. 5f), such that shrinking the betas of the instrument
variables would then increase the slope of the Mendelian randomization
regression, causing the estimated effect size from Mendelian randomi-
zation to increase. This behaviour contrasts with how measurement
noise in the exposure variable impacts direct analyses of association
with the outcome variable (Fig. 5g): in such analyses, noise reduces
the observed association.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The following data resources are available by application: UK Biobank
(http://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), All of Us Research Program (https://
allofus.nih.gov/), SFARI SPARK (https://www.sfari.org/resource/
spark/), MVP-Finngen-UKBB meta-analysis summary statistics (https://
mvp-ukbb.finngen.fi/) and T1DGC HLA imputation panel (https://
repository.niddk.nih.gov/study/173). The following data resources
are publicly available: human reference genome build GRCh38
(https://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/
GRCh38_reference_genome/), TOPMed-r2 imputation panel variant
list (https://imputation.biodatacatalyst.nhlbi.nih.gov/), gnomAD
v.4.1 variant call set (https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/), linkage
disequilibrium score resources ( https://alkesgroup.broadinstitute.
org/LDSCORE/), NCBI Virus for reference sequences (https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/), PrimateAI-3D scores (https://pri -
mateai3d.basespace.illumina.com/), GENCODE 39 definitions (https://
www.gencodegenes.org/) and GTEx expression and splice quantita-
tive trait associations (https://gtexportal.org/home/). Full viral DNA
load GWAS summary statistics are available from the GWAS Catalog
under accessions GCST90809801 to GCST90809829. Viral DNA load
phenotypes for AoU participants are available in the Controlled Tier
workspace (https://workbench.researchallofus.org/workspaces/
aou-rw-77ec99c5/kamitakietalthednaviromevarieswithhumangene -
sandenvironments/data).
Code availability
The following publicly available software resources were used: bwa
(v.0.7.18, https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/), mosdepth (v.0.3.9, https://
github.com/brentp/mosdepth), bcftools (v.1.14, http://www.htslib.
org/), samtools (v.1.15.1, http://www.htslib.org/), plink (v.1.90b6.26
and v.2.00a3.7, https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/), BEAGLE (v.5.4,
https://faculty.washington.edu/browning/beagle/beagle.html), BOL T-
LMM (v.2.5, https://alkesgroup.broadinstitute.org/BOL T-LMM/),
METAL (v.2020-05-05, https://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/METAL),
qqman R package (v.0.1.8, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
qqman/index.html), sf R package (v.1.0-20, https://cran.r-project.
org/web/packages/sf/index.html), logistf R package (v.1.26.1, https://
cran.r-project.org/web/packages/logistf/index.html) and Mendelian-
Randomization R package (v.0.10.0, https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/MendelianRandomization/index.html).
68. Manghi, P. et al. Large-scale metagenomic analysis of oral microbiomes reveals markers
for autism spectrum disorders. Nat. Commun. 15, 9743 (2024).
69. Taliun, D. et al. Sequencing of 53,831 diverse genomes from the NHLBI TOPMed Program.
Nature 590, 290–299 (2021).
70. Gray, G. C. et al. Adult adenovirus infections: loss of orphaned vaccines precipitates
military respiratory disease epidemics. Clin. Infect. Dis. 31, 663–670 (2000).
71. Kamminga, S., van der Meijden, E., Feltkamp, M. C. W. & Zaaijer, H. L. Seroprevalence of
fourteen human polyomaviruses determined in blood donors. PLoS ONE 13, e0206273
(2018).
72. Gossai, A. et al. Seroepidemiology of human polyomaviruses in a US population. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 183, 61–69 (2016).
73. Arze, C. A. et al. Global genome analysis reveals a vast and dynamic anellovirus landscape
within the human virome. Cell Host Microbe 29, 1305–1315.e6 (2021).
74. Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760 (2009).
75. Pedersen, B. S. & Quinlan, A. R. Mosdepth: quick coverage calculation for genomes and
exomes. Bioinformatics 34, 867–868 (2018).
76. Kleiveland, C. R. in The Impact of Food Bioactives on Health: in vitro and ex vivo models
(eds Verhoeckx, K. et al.) Ch. 15 (Springer, 2015).
77. Hujoel, M. L. A. et al. Insights into DNA repeat expansions among 900,000 biobank
participants. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09886-z (2026).
78. Conley, A. B. et al. Rye: genetic ancestry inference at biobank scale. Nucleic Acids Res. 51,
e44 (2023).
79. Jia, X. et al. Imputing amino acid polymorphisms in human leukocyte antigens. PLoS ONE
8, e64683 (2013).
80. Loh, P.-R., Genovese, G. & McCarroll, S. A. Monogenic and polygenic inheritance become
instruments for clonal selection. Nature 584, 136–141 (2020).
81. Browning, B. L., Zhou, Y. & Browning, S. R. A one-penny imputed genome from next-
generation reference panels. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 103, 338–348 (2018).
82. Loh, P.-R. et al. Efficient Bayesian mixed-model analysis increases association power in
large cohorts. Nat. Genet. 47, 284–290 (2015).
83. Kamitaki, N. et al. Human and bacterial genetic variation shape oral microbiomes and
health. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-10037-7 (2026).
84. Hujoel, M. L. A. et al. Influences of rare copy-number variation on human complex traits.
Cell 185, 4233–4248.e27 (2022).
85. Frankish, A. et al. GENCODE: reference annotation for the human and mouse genomes in
2023. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D942–D949 (2023).
86. THE GTEX Consortium The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across
human tissues. Science 369, 1318–1330 (2020).
87. Loh, P.-R. et al. Contrasting genetic architectures of schizophrenia and other complex
diseases using fast variance-components analysis. Nat. Genet. 47, 1385–1392 (2015).
88. Tang, D., Kamitaki, N., Mukamel, R. E., Rubinacci, S. & Loh, P.-R. Patterns and drivers of
43,617 mosaic chromosomal alterations in blood. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/
10.1101/2025.07.30.25332451 (2025).
89. Hujoel, M. L. A. et al. Protein-altering variants at copy number-variable regions influence
diverse human phenotypes. Nat. Genet. 56, 569–578 (2024).
90. Gao, H. et al. The landscape of tolerated genetic variation in humans and primates.
Science 380, eabn8153 (2023).
91. Morales, J. et al. A joint NCBI and EMBL–EBI transcript set for clinical genomics and
research. Nature 604, 310–315 (2022).
92. Willer, C. J., Li, Y. & Abecasis, G. R. METAL: fast and efficient meta-analysis of genomewide
association scans. Bioinformatics 26, 2190–2191 (2010).
93. Bulik-Sullivan, B. et al. An atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases and traits.
Nat. Genet. 47, 1236–1241 (2015).
94. Burgess, S., Davies, N. M. & Thompson, S. G. Bias due to participant overlap in two-sample
Mendelian randomization. Genet. Epidemiol. 40, 597–608 (2016).
95. Yavorska, O. O. & Burgess, S. MendelianRandomization: an R package for performing
Mendelian randomization analyses using summarized data. Int. J. Epidemiol. 46, 1734–1739
(2017).
96. Rees, J. M. B., Wood, A. M., Dudbridge, F. & Burgess, S. Robust methods in Mendelian
randomization via penalization of heterogeneous causal estimates. PLoS ONE 14,
e0222362 (2019).
97. Salzer, U. & Grimbacher, B. TACI deficiency—a complex system out of balance. Curr.
Opin. Immunol. 71, 81–88 (2021).
98. Slob, E. A. W. & Burgess, S. A comparison of robust Mendelian randomization methods
using summary data. Genet. Epidemiol. 44, 313–329 (2020).
Acknowledgements We thank C. Usher for edits to text and figures. This research was
conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under application number 40709. We are grateful
to all of the families in SPARK, the SPARK clinical sites and SPARK staff. We acknowledge
access granted to SPARK genetic data on SFARI Base. N.K. was supported by US NIH
Fellowship F31 DE034283. S.A.M. was supported by US NIH grant R01 HG006855 and the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute. P.-R.L. was supported by US NIH grants R56 HG012698
and R01 HG013110 and a Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award at the Scientific Interfaces.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, the decision to publish
or the preparation of the manuscript. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. Computational analyses
were performed on the O2 High Performance Compute Cluster supported by the Research
Computing Group at Harvard Medical School (http://rc.hms.harvard.edu), the UKB Research
Analysis Platform, and the All of Us Researcher Workbench. The All of Us Research Program
is supported by the NIH, Office of the Director: Regional Medical Centers: 1 OT2 OD026549;
1 OT2 OD026554; 1 OT2 OD026557; 1 OT2 OD026556; 1 OT2 OD026550; 1 OT2 OD026552;
1 OT2 OD026553; 1 OT2 OD026548; 1 OT2 OD026551; 1 OT2 OD026555; IAA no. AOD 16037;
Federally Qualified Health Centers: HHSN 263201600085U; Data and Research Center:
5 U2C OD023196; Biobank: 1 U24 OD023121; The Participant Center: U24 OD023176;
Participant Technology Systems Center: 1 U24 OD023163; Communications and Engagement:
3 OT2 OD023205; 3 OT2 OD023206; and Community Partners: 1 OT2 OD025277; 3 OT2
OD025315; 1 OT2 OD025337; and 1 OT2 OD025276. In addition, the All of Us Research
Program would not be possible without the partnership of its participants.
Author contributions N.K., S.A.M. and P.-R.L. conceived the study design. N.K. performed
computational and statistical analyses. D.T. annotated functional coding variants and
generated the gene burden masks for rare variant associations in UK Biobank. N.K., S.A.M.
and P.-R.L. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10288-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Nolan Kamitaki,
Steven A. McCarroll or Po-Ru Loh.
Peer review information Nature thanks Jacques Fellay who co-reviewed with Ali Saadat;
Emma Thomson, Shaopu Wang and the other, anonymous reviewer for their contribution to
the peer review of this work. Peer review reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Viral DNA load quantification, associations with
blood counts, and identification of endogenous HHV-6 chromosomal
integrants.  a) Locations of the five representative anellovirus reference
genomes included in the viral reference panel relative to other anellovirus
genomes in the multidimensional scaling projection from ref. 73 . b) Prevalence
and abundance of viral DNA sequences in blood samples from AoU (n = 365,918).
c) Prevalence of viral DNA sequences in blood by lymphocyte percentage
(rounded to the nearest integer) in European-ancestry UKB participants
(n = 441,026). P-values are from a model including sex, age, age-squared,
assessment center, and 20 genetic principal components as covariates. Error
bars, 95% CIs. d) Prevalence of viral DNA sequences in saliva-derived WGS by
age (rounded to the nearest month) in SPARK for children under 3 years old
(total n = 576; n = 1, 2, 5, 6, 4, 8, 4, 4 for the 0-month to 7-month bins; 7 ≤ n ≤ 45
for remaining bins). e) Pairwise enrichments of co-observing reads from two
viruses in the same UKB sample. * for p  < 0.01. f) Reticulocyte counts of
European ancestry UKB participants (n = 434,573, y-axis) stratified by number
of reads mapping to the parvovirus B19 genome (x-axis). P-value is from
regression of log-transformed reticulocyte counts on log-transformed B19
reads with sex, age, age-squared, assessment center, and 20 genetic principal
components as covariates. g) Numbers of reads aligned to the HHV-6A (x-axis)
and HHV-6B (y-axis) genomes in blood-derived WGS from UKB. Threshold
lines shown were used to determine carriers of endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B.
A few individuals carrying both integrants are in the top right quadrant.
h) Prevalence and abundance of viral DNA sequences in saliva samples from AoU
(n = 48,899). i) Analogous to g, for saliva-derived WGS from SPARK (n = 12,519).
j) Prevalence and abundance of viral DNA sequences in saliva samples from
children without autism spectrum disorder in SPARK (n = 2,220). k) Prevalence
and abundance of viral DNA sequences in saliva samples from children with
autism spectrum disorder in SPARK (n = 3,540).
Article
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Coverage of viral genomes by aligned WGS reads.
For each virus commonly detected in UKB blood WGS or SPARK saliva WGS,
the proportion of samples containing reads in 500 bp regions spanning the
indicated virus’ genome is plotted. Evenness of coverage indicates that reads
are arising from sparse sampling of viral genomes across people; misalignments
from homologous sequences in the human genome would appear as spikes in
viral genomic coverage. Additional metrics on coverage in each cohort can be
found in Supplementary Tables 2–5.
Extended Data Fig. 3 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Additional data supporting age, sex, circadian, and
seasonal associations with viral DNA load in saliva. a) Abundance of viral
DNA sequences in saliva-derived WGS by age (rounded to the nearest year) in
SPARK. Sample sizes for each virus are in the following panel legends. Error
bars, 95% CIs. b) Abundance of EBV DNA sequences by age in SPARK saliva
WGS, stratified by sex. P-values are from a joint model containing both sex
and an interaction term between sex and age (n = 4,753). Error bars, 95% CIs.
c) Analogous to b, for HHV-7 DNA sequences (n = 9,978). d) Analogous to b, for
HHV-6B DNA sequences (n = 8,528). e) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences in UKB
blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to the nearest hour)
split by assessment center (n = 490,136). f) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences in
UKB blood WGS data by month of sample collection split by assessment center.
g) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA sequences in UKB blood WGS by time of day of
sample collection (rounded to the nearest hour) split by assessment center.
h) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA sequences in UKB blood WGS data by month of
sample collection split by assessment center. i) Prevalence of EBV DNA
sequences in UKB blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to
the nearest hour) split by season (winter, Dec-Feb; spring, Mar-May; summer,
Jun-Aug; autumn, Sep-Nov). j) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA sequences in UKB
blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to the nearest hour)
split by season. k) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences by sample collection time
of day (rounded to the nearest hour) in AoU saliva WGS (n = 18,751). P-values are
from an ANOVA test between models with and without hour of the day. Error
bars, 95% CIs. l) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences by sample collection month
of year in AoU saliva WGS. P-values are from an ANOVA test between models
with and without collection month. Error bars, 95% CIs. m) Lymphocyte
percentage in UKB blood samples by sample collection time of day (n = 472,115).
Error bars, 95% CIs. n) Lymphocyte percentage in UKB blood samples by sample
collection month. Error bars, 95% CIs.
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Variation in viral DNA load in blood and saliva by
genetic ancestry.  a) Prevalence (population frequency) of detectable EBV
DNA positivity (reads that align to the EBV genome) in blood-derived WGS
data by ancestry in UKB (genetically inferred, n = 474,353). Error bars, 95% CIs.
Per-ancestry prevalences and abundances can be found in Supplementary
Table 6. b) Prevalence of EBV DNA positivity in blood-derived WGS data by
genetic ancestry in AoU (n = 365,918). Error bars, 95% CIs. c) Prevalence of
EBV DNA positivity in saliva-derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in AoU
(n = 48,899). Error bars, 95% CIs. d) Abundance of EBV DNA sequences in
saliva-derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in AoU (n = 25,915). Error bars,
95% CIs. e) Analogous to c, for saliva-derived WGS in adults (≥20 years old)
from SPARK (n = 5,691). f) Analogous to d, for saliva-derived WGS in adults
from SPARK (n = 2,730). g) Prevalence of EBV DNA positivity in blood-derived
WGS data from AoU by proportion of estimated American ancestry admixture
(for individuals with estimated >90% European plus American ancestry,
n = 184,514). Error bars, 95% CIs. h) Analogous to g, for proportion of estimated
African ancestry admixture for AoU participants with estimated >90%
European plus African ancestry (n = 168,651). Admixture proportions of
10–30% African ancestry were excluded due to low sample numbers (n < 500).
i) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA positivity in blood-derived WGS data by genetic
ancestry in UKB (n = 474,353). Error bars, 95% CIs. j) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA
positivity in blood-derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in AoU (n = 365,918).
Error bars, 95% CIs. k) Prevalence of anellovirus DNA positivity in blood-
derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in UKB (n = 474,353). Error bars, 95% CIs.
l) Prevalence of anellovirus DNA positivity in blood-derived WGS data by genetic
ancestry in AoU (n = 365,918). Error bars, 95% CIs.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Genome-wide association analyses of HHV-6B and
anellovirus (HD14a and VT416 TTV strains) DNA load in blood.  a) Genome-
wide associations of human genetic variants with HHV-6B DNA load in blood
(inverse-normal transformed abundance), meta-analyzed across UKB
(n = 447,190) and AoU (n = 198,059) European-ancestry sub-cohorts.
b) Analogous to a, for the anellovirus HD14a strain (UKB n = 453,770;
AoU n = 200,091). c) Analogous to a, for the anellovirus VT416 strain
(UKB n = 453,770; AoU n = 200,091).
Extended Data Fig. 6 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
in saliva. a) Genome-wide associations of human genetic variants with EBV DNA
positivity in saliva-derived WGS from European-ancestry AoU participants
(n = 33,164). Given the bimodal distribution of viral DNA load in saliva, in which
samples containing virally-aligned reads often had hundreds or thousands of
reads, we performed GWAS both on binarized viral DNA load (presence/absence
of any reads from the virus) and quantitative viral DNA load phenotypes
(inverse-normal transformed abundance, restricted to individuals whose
saliva WGS had detectable viral DNA) to capture effects on the frequency and
amount of secreted virus. b) Analogous to a, for EBV abundance (n = 16,282).
c) Analogous to a, for HHV-7 positivity (n = 33,050). d) Analogous to a, for HHV-7
abundance (n = 29,989). e) Analogous to a, for HHV-6B positivity (n = 32,711).
Carriers of endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B germline integrations were
excluded. f) Analogous to a, for Merkel cell polyomavirus positivity (n = 33,050).
Extended Data Fig. 7 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Robustness of genetic associations with EBV and
HHV-7 DNA load and GWAS for HHV-6 integration sites. a) Effect sizes for
index variants at 44 independent non-MHC EBV DNA load-associated loci for
association with presence of reads aligned to the left (x-axis) or right (y-axis)
half of the EBV genome (n = 419,249 unrelated European ancestry participants).
b) Analogous to a, for index variants at 34 independent non-MHC HHV-7 DNA
load-associated loci. Two lower frequency variants of large effect size were
excluded to facilitate visualization of the remaining variants. c) Effect sizes for
index variants at 45 independent EBV blood DNA load-associated loci for
association with EBV DNA load in blood samples from UKB (x-axis; n = 453,770)
and AoU (y-axis; n = 201,168). Line shown is the median ratio of effect sizes
between UKB and AoU. d) Analogous to c, for index variants at 35 independent
HHV-7 blood DNA load-associated loci. Two lower frequency variants of large
effect size were excluded to facilitate visualization of the remaining variants.
e) Analogous to c, for index variants at 3 independent HHV-6B blood DNA load-
associated loci. f) Effect sizes for index variants at 45 independent EBV blood or
saliva DNA load-associated loci for association with EBV DNA load in blood
samples from UKB+AoU (x-axis; n = 453,770 + 201,168) and EBV presence in
saliva samples from AoU (y-axis; n = 33,164). Line shown is the median ratio
of effect sizes between UKB+AoU blood and AoU saliva; technical variation
(e.g., in sample processing or DNA sequencing for saliva vs. blood samples)
would generally be expected to increase or decrease signal-to-noise to the
same extent across different genetic effects, which would not explain the
observed heterogeneity in saliva vs. blood effect size ratios. g) Analogous to f,
for index variants at 40 independent HHV-7 blood or saliva DNA load-associated
loci. Two lower frequency variants of large effect size were excluded to facilitate
visualization of the remaining variants. h) Analogous to f, for index variants
at 5 independent HHV-6B blood or saliva DNA load-associated loci. i) Genetic
correlations between viral phenotypes in UKB, AoU, and SPARK. UKB and AoU
were included separately when statistical power was sufficient within each
cohort; for HHV6B and TTV (VT416), only the meta-analysis had sufficient
power. Borders around cells indicate the same phenotype in different cohorts
(e.g., UKB and AoU blood samples). * indicates p  < 0.1 and ** for p < 0.01.
j) Genome-wide associations of human genetic variants with carrier status for
endogenous HHV-6A germline integration (eHHV-6A) in unrelated European-
ancestry UKB participants (n = 419,249). Peritelomeric peaks indicate
haplotypes in linkage disequilibrium with telomeric HHV-6A insertions.
k) Analogous to c, for endogenous HHV-6B germline integration (eHHV-6B).
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Analyses of serology data and comparison with viral
DNA load in blood. a) Associations of variants in the MHC region of the human
genome with quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded EBNA-1 in UKB
serology measurements (y-axis, n = 8,100) and EBV DNA load in UKB blood WGS
(x-axis; n = 453,770). Serology measurements were from unrelated European
ancestry participants and associations were performed with BOLT-LMM using
standard covariates. b) Analogous to a, for quantitative antibody response
to EA-D. c) Analogous to a, for quantitative antibody response to ZEBRA.
d) Analogous to a, for quantitative antibody response to VCA-p18. e) Associations
to quantitative antibody response to HHV-7 encoded U14 (y-axis) and HHV-7
DNA load (x-axis; n = 453,770). f) Quantitative antibody response to EBV-
encoded EBNA-1 (y-axis) stratified by EBV DNA fragment count in UKB blood
WGS (x-axis) in EBV seropositive individuals (n = 8,325). P-value is from a
linear regression model with standard covariates and rank-based inverse
normal transformed EBV read counts. MFI, median fluorescence intensity.
g) Analogous to f, for quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded EA-D.
h) Analogous to f, for quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded ZEBRA.
i) Analogous to f, for quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded VCA-p18.
j) Quantitative antibody response to HHV-7-encoded U14 (y-axis) stratified by
HHV-7 DNA fragment count in UKB blood WGS (x-axis) in HHV-7 seropositive
individuals (n = 8,341). P-value is from a linear regression model including
standard covariates and rank-based inverse normal transformed HHV-7 read
counts.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Non-additive genetic effects and associations of
blood type and coding variants with viral DNA load in blood. a) Prevalence
of detectable EBV positivity by age in UKB blood WGS, stratified by HLA-
DRB1*04:04  genotype (n = 452,318 European ancestry participants). Error bars,
95% CIs. b) Prevalence of detectable HHV-7 positivity by age in UKB blood WGS,
stratified by genotype for a SNP in the MHC region at chr6:31345435. Error bars,
95% CIs. c) Effect sizes of index variants at 44 independent non-MHC loci
associated with EBV DNA load in UKB blood WGS in DRB1*04:04  carriers (x-axis,
n = 34,089) and DRB1*04:04 non-carriers (y-axis, n = 371,339). d) Effect sizes of
index variants at 23 independent non-MHC loci associated with HHV-7 DNA
load in UKB blood WGS in chr6:31345435 T/T homozygotes (x-axis, n = 167,251)
and C/C homozygotes (y-axis, n = 57,034). Three lower frequency variants of
large effect size were excluded to facilitate visualization of the remaining
variants. e) Effect sizes of variants in the MHC region in DRB1*04:04  carriers
(x-axis, n = 34,089) and DRB1*04:04 non-carriers (y-axis, n = 371,339) on EBV
DNA load in UKB blood WGS. Only variants with associations that reached
genome-wide significance in both sample subsets are shown. HLA coding
variants and classical alleles are highlighted in red. f) Prevalence of detectable
EBV positivity by HLA-DRB1*04:04  and HLA-DRB1 T210 genotype combinations
in UKB blood WGS (n = 454,545 European ancestry participants). Error bars,
95% CIs. g) Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity by HLA-DRB1*04:04  and
HLA-DQA1 E198 genotype combinations in UKB blood WGS (n = 454,545
European ancestry participants). Error bars, 95% CIs. h) Prevalence of EBV DNA
positivity by HLA-DRB1*04:04  and HLA-DPB1 V105 genotype combinations
in UKB (n = 454,545 European ancestry participants). Error bars, 95% CIs.
i) Associations of common genetic variants in the MHC region with EBV DNA
load in blood (UKB, n = 453,770 European ancestry participants; x-axis) and
saliva (AoU, n = 33,168 European ancestry participants; y-axis). Variants (dots in
the scatter plot) are colored by linkage disequilibrium with rs12153924  (green-
to-pink shading), which tags the HLA-A*02:01  allele (r2 = 0.99). j) Effect sizes of
HLA-A*02:01 on EBV DNA load in blood (green points; UKB, n = 453,770 European
ancestry participants; AoU, n = 201,181 European ancestry participants) and
saliva (gray points; AoU, n = 33,168 European ancestry participants; SPARK,
n = 9,209 European ancestry participants). For saliva, effect sizes are shown
for both a binary presence/absence phenotype and a quantitative phenotype
(inverse-normal transformed abundance, restricted to individuals whose
saliva WGS had detectable EBV DNA). Error bars, 95% CIs. k) Prevalence of HHV-7
DNA positivity by genetically determined blood type in UKB (n = 456,988
European ancestry participants). Blood type was determined as in ref. 83 .
l) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA positivity by genotype combinations of common
blood type alleles ( O, B, A1, and A2) in UKB. m) Effect size on EBV DNA load
for the CPVL Y168H missense variant and CPVL  loss-of-function variants
(aggregated across such variants in a burden test; n = 453,770). n) Effect size
on EBV DNA load for the TNFRSF13B C104R and A181E missense variants and
TNFRSF13B  loss-of-function variants. TNFRSF13B  coding variants (C104R,
p = 2.3 × 10−14 ; A181E, p = 3.5 × 10−12 ) lead to impaired ligand binding and
downstream signaling 97.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
in blood samples from African ancestry participants.  a) Genome-wide
associations of human genetic variants with EBV DNA positivity in blood-derived
WGS from African-ancestry AoU participants (n = 77,573). b) Genome-wide
associations of human genetic variants with HHV-7 DNA positivity in blood-
derived WGS from African-ancestry AoU participants (n = 77,573). c) Prevalence
of detectable EBV and HHV-7 positivity (reads mapping to each viral genome)
by genetic ancestry and Duffy-null genotype in AoU blood WGS (n = 251,209
participants). The AFR sub-cohort analyzed here consisted of individuals with
70–90% African ancestry (n = 51,052 participants) to minimize correlation of
Duffy-null genotype with admixture proportion. Error bars, 95% CIs. d) Number
of reads mapping to the EBV (n = 18,723 participants) and HHV-7 (n = 33,823
participants) genomes by genetic ancestry and Duffy-null genotype in AoU
saliva WGS. The AFR sub-cohort analyzed here consisted of individuals with
70–90% African ancestry (n = 51,052 participants) to minimize correlation of
Duffy-null genotype with admixture proportion. Error bars, 95% CIs.
Extended Data Fig. 11 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 11 | Validation of type-informative EBV genome regions
and assessment of quantitative antibody responses for EBV type 1 and
type 2. a) Frequencies of observing WGS reads mapping to each 500 bp segment
of the EBV type 1 (black line) and type 2 (green line) reference genomes in blood
WGS samples from UKB (n = 490,401). Highlighted in gray are two regions used
to distinguish EBV types, both containing genes with known type-specific
sequences, EBNA2 and EBNA3A– EBNA3C. Read alignments in these two regions
show consistent ratios of type 1-aligned to type 2-aligned reads, whereas other
EBV genomic regions (which are not type-informative) do not. b) Pairwise
correlations in the abundances of DNA sequences mapping to 500 bp segments
of the EBV type 2 genome in saliva WGS samples from SPARK with >1 type-
specific alignment (n = 4,757). For each sample, read counts for each 500 bp bin
were first normalized by the maximum number of reads in any 500 bp region
across the EBV type 1 and type 2 genomes. Regions used for downstream EBV
type analyses (containing EBNA2  and EBNA3A– EBNA3C ) are highlighted. The
correlation heatmap shows that reads aligning to the EBV type 2 genome in
these two regions tended to occur in the same individuals. c) Proportion of UKB
participants positive for EBV type 2 reads (as a fraction of those positive for
either type 1 or type 2) by country of birth within the United Kingdom and
Republic of Ireland, stratified by HLA-B*08:01  allele carrier status (n = 456,923).
The effect of B*08:01 on EBV type 1 versus type 2 (decreasing the proportion of
individuals with EBV type 1 relative to type 2) appeared to be present across all
geographic regions of the United Kingdom, which vary in rates of EBV type 2
prevalence (Fig.  5c). Error bars, 95% CIs. d) Proportion of UKB participants
positive for EBV DNA by region of birth within the United Kingdom. Map source:
Office for National Statistics, licensed under the Open Government Licence
v.3.0 and Contains OS data. Crown copyright and database right 2017–2026.
e) Distribution of quantitative antibody response to VCA-p18 for EBV seropositive
UKB participants with type-informative EBV DNA sequences exclusively from
the EBV type 1 (black) or type 2 (green) genomes (n = 335 with available serology
measurements). P-values are from linear regression including age, age-squared,
sex, assessment center, and 20 ancestry PCs as covariates. MFI, median
fluorescence intensity. f) Analogous to c, for quantitative antibody response
to EBNA-1. g) Analogous to c, for quantitative antibody response to EA-D.
h) Analogous to c, for quantitative antibody response to ZEBRA.
Extended Data Fig. 12 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 12 | Additional data regarding associations of viral
DNA load with clinical phenotypes and smoking. a) Associations of clinical
conditions with detectable viral positivity (presence of viral DNA sequences in
blood WGS) in European-ancestry UKB participants (n = 453,770). Significant
associations (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05) are colored by direction of effect.
b) Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity (in green) and HHV-7 positivity
(in blue) by cigarettes smoked per day in AoU blood samples (n = 365,918).
Prevalences among individuals who have never smoked or formerly smoked are
indicated by the square points on the left. Error bars, 95% CIs. c) Prevalence of
detectable EBV positivity in AoU saliva WGS (n = 48,899) by cigarettes smoked
per day. Prevalences among individuals who have never smoked or formerly
smoked are indicated by the square points to the left. Error bars, 95% CIs.
d) Analogous to b, for mean EBV abundance (geometric mean among samples
with at least one read pair). e) Effect sizes for 44 common genetic variants
(at distinct non-MHC loci)—used as instrument variables in Mendelian
randomization—for EBV DNA load (x-axis; n = 638,825) and risk for multiple
sclerosis (y-axis; meta-analysis of 7,907 cases and 1,474,810 controls). The line
shown is from the MR-Egger test; the y-intercept is not significantly different
from OR = 1, indicating low pleiotropy of the genetic instruments. f) Estimates
of the causal effect of EBV DNA load (exposure) on risk for systemic lupus
erythematosus (outcome; meta-analysis of 3,491 cases and 1,361,247 controls)
using different Mendelian randomization approaches (y-axis) with 44 non-MHC
loci as instrument variables. An estimate is plotted in green if its 95% CI does
not overlap an odds ratio of 1 (no effect). Error bars, 95% CIs. However, as these
results replicated inconsistently across MR approaches with different
assumptions 98, we do not conclude causality, but rather that viral DNA load
is more likely to affect the risk of systemic lupus erythematosus compared
to MS. g) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for rheumatoid
arthritis (meta-analysis of 35,875 cases and 1,296,933 controls). Error bars,
95% CIs. h) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for lymphoid
leukemia (meta-analysis of 5,966 cases and 1,248,154 controls). Error bars,
95% CIs. i) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (meta-analysis of 13,198 cases and 1,273,062 controls). Error bars,
95% CIs. j) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (meta-analysis of 4,467 cases and 1,248,724 controls).
Error bars, 95% CIs.
1 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Corresponding author(s): Nolan Kamitaki
Last updated by author(s): Feb 11, 2026
Reporting Summary
Nature Portfolio wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Portfolio policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used for data collection.
Data analysis The following publicly available software resources were used: bwa (v0.7.18, https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/), mosdepth (v0.3.9, https://
github.com/brentp/mosdepth), bcftools (v1.14, http://www.htslib.org/), samtools (v1.15.1, http://www.htslib.org/), plink (v1.90b6.26 and
v2.00a3.7, https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/), BEAGLE (v5.4, https://faculty.washington.edu/browning/beagle/beagle.html), BOLT-LMM
(v2.5, https://alkesgroup.broadinstitute.org/BOLT-LMM/), METAL (v2020-05-05, https://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/METAL), qqman R
package (v0.1.8, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/qqman/index.html), sf R package (v1.0-20, https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/sf/index.html), logistf R package (v1.26.1, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/logistf/index.html), and
MendelianRandomization R package (v0.10.0, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MendelianRandomization/index.html).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Portfolio guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
2 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
- For clinical datasets or third party data, please ensure that the statement adheres to our policy
The following data resources are available by application: UK Biobank (http://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), All of Us Research Program (https://allofus.nih.gov/), SFARI
SPARK (https://www.sfari.org/resource/spark/), MVP-Finngen-UKBB meta-analysis summary statistics (https://mvp-ukbb.finngen.fi/), and T1DGC HLA imputation
panel (https://repository.niddk.nih.gov/study/173). The following data resources are publicly available: human reference genome build GRCh38 (https://
ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/GRCh38_reference_genome/), TOPMed-r2 imputation panel variant list (https://
imputation.biodatacatalyst.nhlbi.nih.gov/), gnomAD v4.1 variant call set (https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/), LD score resources https://
alkesgroup.broadinstitute.org/LDSCORE/), NCBI Virus for reference sequences (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/), PrimateAI-3D scores (https://
primateai3d.basespace.illumina.com/), GENCODE 39 definitions (https://www.gencodegenes.org/), and GTEx expression and splice quantitative trait associations
(https://gtexportal.org/home/). Full viral DNA load GWAS summary statistics are available from the GWAS Catalog under accessions GCST90809801 to
GCST90809829.
Research involving human participants, their data, or biological material
Policy information about studies with human participants or human data. See also policy information about sex, gender (identity/presentation),
and sexual orientation and race, ethnicity and racism.
Reporting on sex and gender For UK Biobank (recorded 222,094 males, 263,132 females), sex was acquired from NHS central registry at recruitment, but
in some cases updated by the participant. For All of Us (recorded 161,253 males, 252,074 females), sex was genetically
determined by copy number and presence of X and Y chromosomes. For SFARI SPARK (recorded 7284 males, 5235 females),
sex was self-reported. Sex was used as a covariate in most analyses (ex. human genetic associations with viral load), where no
values directly pertaining to sex are reported for these analyses. Values pertaining to sex were reported for analyses that
demonstrated higher viral load in men (Fig. 2a-d, EDF 3c-e).
Reporting on race, ethnicity, or
other socially relevant
groupings
UK Biobank, using the top 20 ancestry principal components, a subset of individuals that fell within a Euclidean distance
(centered at the mean values of each PC for individuals who self-identified as "white") capturing 99% of individuals who self-
identified as "white" were used for genotype and phenotype associations. For All of Us, analyses were restricted to
individuals with previously released genetically-predicted European ancestry for genotype and phenotype associations. For
SPARK, using the top 10 ancestry principal components, a subset of individuals that fell within a Euclidean distance (centered
at the mean values of each PC for individuals who self-identified as "white") capturing 90% of individuals who self-identified
as "white" were used for genotype and phenotype associations.  For all analyses, ancestry principal components were
included as covariates in genetic associations. For associations of viral DNA with ancestry, these genetically-predicted
ancestries were used as independent variables for association with viral DNA.
Population characteristics UK Biobank is a cohort of approximately 500,000 individuals across the United Kingdom between 40 and 69 years of age at
time of recruitment (Sudlow et al. 2015 PLOS Medicine). For viral DNA associations in the UK Biobank cohort, age, age
squared, sex, genotype array, assessment center, and top 20 genetic ancestry PCs were used as covariates. All of Us is a
cohort of 414,817 individuals with WGS available (at time of analysis) across the United States older than 18 years of age at
time of recruitment (The All of Us Research Program Investigators 2019 N Engl J Med). For viral DNA associations in the All of
Us cohort, age, age squared, sex, and the top 16 genetic ancestry principal components (from ancestry_preds.tsv) were used
as covariates. SFARI SPARK is a cohort of approximately 160,000 families with at least one child with autism spectrum
disorder, where 12,519 individuals (at time of analysis) have WGS from saliva available (SPARK Consortium 2018 Neuron).
Children range in age from 0-50 years of age (mean 9 years) and parents from 19-90 years of age (mean 41 years). For viral
DNA associations in the SPARK SFARI cohort, sequencing batch, age, age squared, square root of age, sex, percent of mapped
reads, and the top 10 genetic ancestry principal components were used as covariates.
Recruitment Individuals and biosamples were not obtained for this study and their recruitment is as described in prior publications (cited
in current work).
Ethics oversight Individuals and biosamples were not obtained for this study and local IRBs at each institution approved the collections and
patient-consent materials, as described in the earlier papers on these cohorts (cited in current work). Datasets were used as
approved for research plans as stated in applications to each, including UK Biobank Resource application #40709.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences  Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
3 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size For associations in the UK Biobank WGS data set, individuals were excluded based on the following criteria: removed for not having European
genetic ancestry; removed for not having available TOPMed-imputed genotypes (including for chromosome X); and removed for having
withdrawn, leaving 453,770 available individuals for genetic association analyses.  For some associations using linear regression rather than
linear mixed models that would account for relatedness (ex. HLA local associations), additional samples were removed to drop one relative
within pairs of close relatives with kinship coefficient > 0.0884.
For associations in the All of Us cohort, 414,817 samples with available WGS were first separated into those where sample DNA was either
blood (n=365,918) or saliva-derived (n=48,899). Individuals were then excluded for not having European genetic ancestry, leaving 201,181
blood-derived samples and 33,164 saliva-derived samples. For analyses of HHV-6B viral load, individuals with endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B
were excluded, leaving 199,133 blood-derived samples and 32,826 saliva samples. For saliva-derived samples, some associations (such as
those associating quantity rather than presence of viral DNA) were then performed on the subset of samples with at least 1 viral DNA
sequence, leaving a subset of samples as noted in the text (ex. 16,282 samples for EBV).
For associations in the SFARI SPARK cohort, among 12,519 samples with available WGS data some samples were removed for not having
European genetic ancestry, leaving 9,209 individuals. For analyses of HHV-6B viral load, individuals with endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B were
excluded, leaving 9,081 individuals. Some associations associating quantity rather than presence of viral DNA were then performed on the
subset of samples with at least 1 viral DNA sequence, leaving a reduced sample number as noted in the text.
In all cases, no sample-size calculation was done to predetermine sample size and the maximum number of available samples were used. For
viral DNA genetic associations, we expected that although the phenotype was sparser with less dynamic range than previous work measuring
viral load by PCR (ex. HIV viral load), that the greatly increased sample size (2-3 orders of magnitude) would allow for observing expected
associations in the MHC region of the human genome. Previous work has also suggested EBV viral load to be heritable.
Data exclusions Established QC metrics were used to exclude some samples, genotypes, or sequencing data for analysis as described in previously published
studies (cited in the current work). In brief: For UK Biobank WGS, the sequencing of 914 participants failed due to either insufficient or poor-
quality DNA. For UK Biobank array genotypes used for imputation, ~3% of samples had insufficient DNA to use as input for genotyping and
968 samples with genotypes were excluded for high heterozygosity or >5% missing rate. For All of Us WGS, samples were excluded for low
quality or insufficient DNA for library production and 987 samples were at least eight median absolute deviations from median residual in at
least one type of variant metric (ex. number of SNPs, number of indels). For SPARK WGS, no samples were excluded by QC criteria. Samples
from individuals in UK Biobank, All of Us, and SFARI SPARK that requested to be withdrawn at the time of analysis were excluded.
Replication For each viral association observed in UK Biobank (blood) and SPARK (saliva), we were generally successful in replicating those tested in the
subset of All of Us samples with DNA derived from the same source (blood or saliva) such that each had a single attempt at replication.  This
included associations with human genetics (besides one EBV-associated locus that had discordant direction of effect in blood samples from All
of Us relative to UK Biobank), smoking, age, sex, time of day, and month of the year. We did not attempt replication of binary ICD-10 code
phenotypes in All of Us.
Additionally, we attempted to verify all genetic associations to EBV and HHV-7 load in UK Biobank by generating additional phenotypes from
reads aligning to the left and right halves of each genome and evaluating whether associations to all virally-aligned reads replicated in these
phenotypes. All loci but 1 successfully replicated (the same locus which failed replication in All of Us), such that each association had a single
attempt at replication with this approach.
Randomization For UK Biobank, samples were collected in batches at different assessment centers at locations across the United Kingdom and these were
encoded as indicator covariates in phenotype-genotype associations. For All of Us, samples were collected in batches at different sequencing
centers, and these were encoded as indicator variables in phenotype-genotype associations. For SFARI SPARK, samples were collected in
different batches of sequencing cohorts (WGS1 through WGS5) and these were encoded as indicator covariates in phenotype-genotype
associations. No further randomization was done in each cohort as all samples were used for each analysis.
Blinding For data collection, blinding was not relevant as data was collected by other research groups (cited in the current work) and re-analyzed in
this work. For all computational analyses blinding was always done, as samples were listed with a randomized ID where association of
measured genotype with viral DNA phenotype was only done at the point of final statistical analysis.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
4 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Plants
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
Novel plant genotypes Describe the methods by which all novel plant genotypes were produced. This includes those generated by transgenic approaches,
gene editing, chemical/radiation-based mutagenesis and hybridization. For transgenic lines, describe the transformation method, the
number of independent lines analyzed and the generation upon which experiments were performed. For gene-edited lines, describe
the editor used, the endogenous sequence targeted for editing, the targeting guide RNA sequence (if applicable) and how the editor
was applied.
Seed stocks Report on the source of all seed stocks or other plant material used. If applicable, state the seed stock centre and catalogue number. If
plant specimens were collected from the field, describe the collection location, date and sampling procedures.
Authentication Describe any authentication procedures for each seed stock used or novel genotype generated. Describe any experiments used to
assess the effect of a mutation and, where applicable, how potential secondary effects (e.g. second site T-DNA insertions, mosiacism,
off-target gene editing) were examined.
Plants