# s41586-026-10276-2

Nature  |  www.nature.com  |  1
Article
Structural energetics of cold sensitivity
Kevin Y. Choi1,2,3,5, Xiaoxuan Lin4,5, Yifan Cheng1,4 ✉ & David Julius2 ✉
Thermosensitive transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channels enable somatosensory
nerve fibres to detect changes in our thermal environment over a wide physiologic
range1–3. In mammals, the menthol receptor, TRPM8, is activated by temperatures
below approximately 26 °C and is essential for the perception of cold or chemical
cooling agents4–6. A fascinating, yet still unachieved goal is to elucidate mechanisms,
both structural and thermodynamic, whereby TRPM8 or other thermosensitive
channels are gated by changes in ambient temperature. Recent studies using cryogenic
electron microscopy have attempted to address this challenging question but are
limited by difficulties in visualizing temperature-evoked conformational sub-states or
assessing the energetic landscape governing gating transitions7,8. Here we close this
gap by combining cryogenic electron microscopy with hydrogen–deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry to elucidate a mechanism for cold-evoked activation of TRPM8.
First, we visualize TRPM8 channels in cellular membranes, where bona fide menthol-
and cold-evoked open states are captured. We also identify a new ‘semi-swapped’
architecture in which interdigitation of channel sub-units is rearranged substantially
following repositioning of the S6 transmembrane helix and elements of the pore region.
We then use hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to pinpoint the pore
and TRP helices as the regions exhibiting the greatest stimulus-evoked energetic
changes that drive channel gating. Specifically, cold-evoked stabilization of the outer
pore region repositions the pore lining S6 transmembrane helix while enabling binding
of a regulatory lipid to stabilize the open channel. Structural mechanisms associated
with activation are validated by comparison of human TRPM8 with the menthol-
sensitive but relatively cold-insensitive avian orthologue. We propose a free energy
landscape and conformational pathway whereby cold or cooling agents activate this
thermosensory receptor.
Theoretical or experimental approaches have ascribed the unusually
robust temperature sensitivity of transient receptor potential (TRP)
channels to changes in heat capacity (for example, through solvation
of buried hydrophobic residues) or partial protein unfolding transi-
tions9–11. Mutagenesis and structural studies have identified numerous
residues or regions that modulate TRP channel thermosensitivity or
exhibit temperature-dependent conformational changes, indicating
that temperature-evoked channel gating represents a distributive pro-
cess9,12–20. At the same time, stimulus-evoked changes in heat capacity
or protein folding may still be manifest within specific regions of the
channel that are critical parts of a gating pathway. It now seems clear
that identifying such regions and understanding their contributions
to temperature-evoked channel gating will require the application
of structural approaches together with methods that can assess the
energetic landscape over specific temperature ranges.
On the structural front, biophysical properties of thermosensitive
TRP channels indicate the existence of numerous sub-states associ-
ated with multi-modal regulation, adaptation or inherent thermal
instability21–23. In the case of TRPM8, structural heterogeneity may
be exacerbated by the channel’s cold sensitivity, resulting in a range
of conformational sub-states that are too transient or numerous to
register as principal structural subclasses during cryogenic electron
microscopy (cryo-EM) analysis24,25 (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supple-
mentary Table 1). Indeed, of the previously described TRPM8 struc-
tures22,24–28, none convincingly represent a purely cold-evoked open
state or provide structural insights into thermal gating mechanisms,
which may reflect the fact that they have all been determined with
detergent-extracted and solubilized material. Here we address this
limitation by capturing new TRPM8 structures in cell-derived vesicles
prepared without detergents29,30.
On the thermodynamic front, previous studies of thermosensitive
TRP channels (most notably the capsaicin- and heat-activated TRPV1
channel), have been carried out with methods that assess global ener-
getics associated with temperature changes10,11. We now address this
limitation by using hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry
(HDX–MS) to assess contributions from local regions and develop an
energetic landscape across the TRPM8 protein sequence. Together,
our results provide a structural and energetic framework to explain
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10276-2
Received: 3 June 2025
Accepted: 12 February 2026
Published online: xx xx xxxx
Open access
Check for updates
1Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San Franscisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 2Department of Physiology, University of California San Franscisco, San Francisco,
CA, USA. 3Chemistry and Chemical Biology Graduate Program, University of California San Franscisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 5These authors contributed equally: Kevin Y. Choi, Xiaoxuan Lin. ✉e-mail: yifan.cheng@ucsf.edu; david.julius@ucsf.edu
2  |  Nature  |  www.nature.com
Article
TRPM8 cold sensitivity while demonstrating the power of combining
structural analysis with thermodynamic measurements to reveal a
conformational landscape underlying physiologic function.
New TRPM8 architecture in cell vesicles
To visualize TRPM8 in cellular bilayers, we began with an avian ortho-
logue for which detailed structural information already exists24,31.
HEK293 cells heterologously expressing the Parus major (Pm) chan-
nel bearing an N-terminal green fluorescent protein (GFP) tag were
sonicated and inside-out vesicles enriched by affinity chromatography.
Our initial analysis was stymied by poor signal-to-noise, which we then
mitigated by introducing a second purification step using size exclu-
sion chromatography, yielding micrographs with greatly improved
contrast and sample distribution (Supplementary Fig. 1). These raw
micrographs showed clear features of TRPM8 in a cellular bilayer,
which, with further processing, yielded featured two-dimensional
class averages that confirmed the presence of cytoplasmic elements
facing outward from the vesicle (Supplementary Fig. 1). From these
data we obtained high resolution (3–3.5 Å) structures, including the
previously described desensitized closed states24,27,32 (Extended Data
Fig. 2 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2), characterized by a homo-
tetrameric arrangement in which each subunit consists of an N-terminal
cytoplasmic domain followed by six transmembrane helices (S1–S6)
arranged in a classic domain swap architecture with the central ion
permeation pathway formed by S5 and S6 helices together with the
intervening pore helix and outer pore loop.
In addition to these familiar structures, we identified a new sub-
state whose most notable feature is a distinct domain swap architecture
(Fig. 1a). In this configuration, the S6 helix and the associated pore
loop are not interdigitated with the neighbouring subunit but instead
remain associated with their cognate S1–S4 voltage sensor-like domain
(VSLD). This new ‘semi-swapped’ configuration reflects a large reposi-
tioning of the S6 helix such that it bends by around 52° to replace the
S6 helix from a neighbouring subunit that otherwise engages in the
canonical domain swap architecture (henceforth referred to as ‘fully
swapped’) (Fig. 1b). These changes within the pore region are accom-
panied by exuberant movements in the associated outer pore loops,
whereas the relative positions of the pore helices remain unchanged
(Fig. 1b). Critical evidence for the semi-swapped configuration is pro-
vided by clear densities demonstrating reconfiguration of the connect-
ing regions on both ends of the S6 helix: the pore helix and pore loop
a
Fully swapped
Semi-swapped
TMD
Extra-
cellular
MHR
Intra-cellular view TMD
Extra-cellular view
180°
~52º
S6
VSLD
Outer
pore loop
Pore
helix
c
TRP helix
S6
S6
TRP helix
Fully swapped
Semi-swapped
Y905
S6
S5
D908
R875
E896
D907
Pore
helix
Outer
pore loop
Fully swapped
Semi-swapped
L965
F969
V966
Chain A
C
B
D
V966
F969
L965
20
30
40
50
60
0
2
4
6
Position along axis (Å)
Radius (Å)
b
e
f
g
d
π
α
Fig. 1 | Fully and semi-swapped configurations of avian TRPM8 in vesicles.
a, Side view of fully (left) and semi-swapped (right) channel structures
determined in cell membrane vesicles maintained at 4 °C before vitrification
and in the absence of menthol or calcium. A ribbon diagram of one subunit is
fitted into the density. TMD, transmembrane domain (shaded area); MHR,
cytoplasmic melastatin homology region. b, Reconfiguration from fully (left)
to semi-swapped (right) channel, illustrated for the transmembrane domain of
one subunit, is characterized by approximately 52° bend of S6 at the junction
with the TRP domain, repositioning the outer pore loops, but not the pore helix.
c, Top view showing density and ribbon diagram model of outer pore loop for
fully (left) and semi-swapped (right) configuration. d, Close-up bottom views of
S6–TRP helices in fully (left) and semi-swapped (right) configurations. Sub-unit
colour scheme is the same for a, c and d. e, In the semi-swapped configuration,
the pore domain is stabilized by extensive interactions between Y905 in the
pore loop and charged residues in the pore helix and S5 of the adjacent subunit.
f, A closed lower gate constriction is formed by V966 of S6 in the fully swapped
configuration (π-helical form, left panel), or by L965 and F969 in the semi-
swapped structure (fully α-helical form, right panel). g, Pore profiles of closed
gate in fully and semi-swapped structure.
Nature  |  www.nature.com  |  3
of one subunit separate to form the pore domain in conjunction with
the neighbouring subunit, whereas the linker between the S6 and TRP
helices adopts an acutely bent conformation (Fig. 1c,d). Transitions
between the fully and semi-swapped configurations do not require
tetramer disassembly (Supplementary Video 1).
Another notable feature of the semi-swapped configuration can be
seen at the inter-protomer interface, where the S6 helix and outer pore
loop of one subunit engages with S5 and pore helices of the neighbour-
ing subunit such that Y905 is buried in an amphipathic pocket (Fig. 1e).
This new semi-swapped configuration differs not only from the canoni-
cal domain-swapped architecture, but also from previously described
non-swapped configurations seen in tetrameric voltage-gated potas-
sium channels33,34. Using the cell-derived vesicle approach, we observed
both fully- and semi-swapped structures in the absence or presence
of calcium (5 mM) and found that human TRPM8 adopts these same
configurations (Supplementary Table 1), demonstrating a conserved
architecture across avian and mammalian species.
Notably, in the semi-swapped configuration, a π- to α-helical tran-
sition occurs in the vicinity of N958, introducing a register shift by a
single residue in the lower half of the S6 helix (Fig. 1f), reminiscent of
an agonist-induced gating reconfiguration seen in other TRP channels
that is achieved through a π to α transition23,35. Consequently, the lower
hydrophobic restriction, formed by V966 in the fully swapped con-
figuration, is now constituted by L965 and F969 in the semi-swapped
state (Fig. 1f,g). This reorientation of the S6 helix is accompanied by
repositioning Y905 at the selectivity filter, thereby further widening
this region (Fig. 1g).
In our previous structures of Pm TRPM8 (ref. 24), we observed both
α and π configurations in S6, which we attributed to closed and desen-
sitized states, respectively, as the π configuration was seen only in the
presence of calcium, which is required for functional desensitization.
In our vesicle preparation we find that the S6 π configuration is seen
only in the fully swapped architecture with or without calcium (Sup-
plementary Table 1), indicating that this state, previously designated
as desensitized, may represent a distinct closed state or a desensitized
state that persists after removal of calcium.
Menthol modulates equilibrium between states
Among the population of well-resolved avian TRPM8 particles, we
observed a decrease in those corresponding to the fully swapped
configuration (with a concomitant increase in the semi-swapped con-
figuration) in the presence of menthol (Fig. 2a), indicating that inter-
conversion between these states occurs and is physiologically relevant.
To further probe the native state ensemble of TRPM8, we performed
HDX–MS experiments to assess both intrinsic and ligand-dependent
dynamics of purified, detergent-solubilized avian (Pm) or human (Homo
sapiens (Hs)) channels (Supplementary Table 3). The HDX rate measures
the kinetics of exchange between backbone amide hydrogens and the
solvent deuterium. Exchange is governed by transient breakage of
hydrogen bonds during thermal fluctuation; hence, HDX–MS provides
a direct readout of protein dynamics and the underlying folding free
energy (∆G) that can be mapped to specific residues36,37.
In these experiments, most peptides derived from proteolysis follow-
ing H–D exchange exhibited unimodal mass distributions, indicative
of a single dominant conformation within the corresponding regions
(Fig. 2b and Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). In contrast, peptides covering
the pore and TRP helices each showed clear bimodal mass envelopes
that increased in mass over labelling time, indicating the coexistence
of two conformational populations38 (Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary
Figs. 3–6). One mass envelope was observed to exchange more than
100-fold faster than the other, corresponding to a difference in fold-
ing free energy of at least 3 kcal mol−1 (Methods). Notably, the ratio of
heavier to lighter mass envelopes increased progressively over labelling
time, indicating that these two populations undergo interconversion
on the HDX–MS time scale (minutes to hours) (Fig. 2b–d and Supple-
mentary Figs. 4–6).
The regions exhibiting bimodality (pore and TRP helices) align closely
with those predicted to undergo large conformational transitions
between our fully and semi-swapped models, leading us to propose
that the two mass envelopes reflect deuterium uptake associated with
these two structural states. Given the additional stabilizing interactions
formed at the outer pore region in the semi-swapped configuration of
the avian channel (Fig. 1e), we infer that the slower-exchanging popula-
tion represents the semi-swapped state, whereas the faster-exchanging
population corresponds to the fully swapped state. This interpreta-
tion is corroborated further by the observation that addition of men-
thol increased the proportion of the slower-exchanging population
(semi-swapped) (Fig. 2e), consistent with the conformational redis-
tribution observed in single-particle cryo-EM.
Menthol stabilizes the TRP helix
We resolved structures of human and avian TRPM8 channels in vesi-
cles in the presence of menthol (Supplementary Table 1). These maps
enabled us to model the VSLD (proposed binding site for menthol and
other channel modulators)24,28,39,40, thereby revealing a menthol-like
density (absent in unliganded datasets) (Fig. 3a,b and Extended Data
Fig. 3). When docked and refined into the cryo-EM density, our models
reveal several key interactions between the lower cavity of the VSLD and
menthol (Fig. 3b). For example, the hydroxyl group of menthol forms
close contact with arginine (R832 in avian or R842 in human TRPM8)
(2.9 Å), which is within hydrogen bonding distance. A network of hydro-
phobic side chains along the inner cavity of the VSLD forms extensive
interactions with menthol, probably contributing to its stabilization
within the pocket (Fig. 3b). Compared with the closed, unliganded
structures, binding of menthol is accompanied by repositioning of the
TRP helix such that it is in closer proximity to the VSLD (Extended Data
Fig. 3), yielding an open channel (Extended Data Fig. 8b; see also section
‘A cold-activated TRPM8 structure’ below).
To investigate the thermodynamic basis driving the menthol-modu-
lated dynamic equilibrium, we performed differential HDX to identify
residues showing changes in deuterium labelling in the presence of
menthol. Exchange rates for peptides covering the TRP helix slowed
by tenfold, corresponding to a stabilization energy of 1.4 kcal mol−1,
whereas HDX for the remaining transmembrane domain was unchanged
(Fig. 3c,d). This stabilization of the TRP helix includes Y995 (or Y1005 for
the human channel), a residue that interacts directly with menthol in our
structural models, highlighting the TRP helix as a main energetic con-
tributor to ligand-induced conformational changes. Agonist-induced
stabilization was seen whether menthol was added to purified TRPM8
protein or to whole cells before protein extraction, indicating that the
observed changes reflect intrinsic properties of the channel rather than
alterations in cellular or membrane properties (Extended Data Fig. 4).
Structural basis of differential cold sensitivity
TRPM8 channels show pronounced species-specific differences in ther-
mal sensitivity, with avian orthologues being relatively insensitive to
cold compared with their mammalian counterparts41,42 (Supplementary
Fig. 7). Despite this functional divergence, the two orthologues share
high similarity in both sequence (92%) and structure (r.m.s.d. = 1.0 Å
for PDB IDs 6O6A and 8BDC). However, our structural analyses in vesi-
cles, as well as HDX–MS measurements, show that the human channel
exhibits much greater heterogeneity than appreciated previously. We
therefore propose that differential cold sensitivity between mamma-
lian and avian species arises from distinct thermodynamic properties
rather than principal structural differences in the low-energy states.
Building on this rationale, we sought to identify regions within the
mammalian channel that exhibit temperature-induced dynamics
4  |  Nature  |  www.nature.com
Article
distinct from its avian counterpart using temperature-dependent
HDX–MS coupled with van’t Hoff analysis. To do so, we performed
HDX on avian and human TRPM8 at four temperatures spanning the
activation threshold of around 26 °C for the human channel and con-
verted HDX rates to ∆G values (Extended Data Fig. 5; Methods). We
noted that many regions showed increased stability (more negative
∆G) as temperature decreased, indicating enthalpically driven stabiliza-
tion (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Van’t Hoff analysis showed nonlinearity
in many regions of human TRPM8, indicating changes in heat capac-
ity (∆Cp) over the experimental temperature ranges (Extended Data
Fig. 5b). In contrast, van’t Hoff analysis for avian TRPM8 showed weak
non-linear trends, indicating an almost constant Cp. We then calcu-
lated the standard folding enthalpy (∆H°) within each temperature
window (37–30 °C, 30–22 °C and 22–4 °C), which enabled us to gen-
erate sequence-wide, residue-level enthalpic profiles for both ortho-
logues (Fig. 4a). We noted that, although the overall energetics (∆G)
for many regions were similar between orthologues—often differing
by less than 1 kBT (spontaneous thermal fluctuation energy)—key dif-
ferences emerged when examining the enthalpic contribution (∆H°)
to folding energy. We found that many regions in the human channel
showed greater changes in ∆H° than the avian channel, highlighting the
prevalence of local ∆Cp and temperature-induced dynamics (Fig. 4a).
a
0
25
50
75
100
Apo
Particle fraction (%)
Semi-swapped
Undetermined
Fully swapped
One state
Two states
No or very slow interconversion
m/z
HDX tme
m/z
HDX time
m/z
HDX time
t =
many
hours
t =
minutes
to hours
b
Pore helix
m/z
Pm
Hs
m/z
4 min
40 min
400 min
TRP helix
Pm
Hs
m/z
4 min
40 min
400 min
c
Pm
e
Slower-exchanging mass distribution (%)
Hs
d
103
104
105
HDX time (s)
0
50
100
Fraction
0
25
50
75
100
Deuteration (%)
Pm
Hs
Apo
Menthol
40
60
80
100
40
60
80
100
Pm
Hs
0
25
50
75
100
0
50
100
Menthol
Slow interconversion (this study)
m/z
103
104
105
HDX time (s)
Fig. 2 | Menthol modulates the dynamic equilibrium of TRPM8. a, Particle
distribution in the apo or menthol-treated pmTRPM8 datasets corresponding to
semi-swapped (green; 24% apo, 37% menthol), undetermined (grey; 58% apo,
57% menthol) and fully swapped (yellow; 18% apo, 6% menthol) configurations.
Samples were incubated at 4 °C for 2–15 min with or without menthol (1 mM)
before vitrification. Particles categorized as ‘undetermined’ refer to those for
which resolution of key regions that distinguish fully from semi-swapped
configurations was insufficient for unambiguous categorization. b, Schematic
depicting mass distributions for a deuterated peptide. Left, a ‘one state’ scenario
in which peptides with a single conformation or rapid interconversion between
conformations show unimodal mass distributions. Right, a ‘two state’ scenario
in which peptides with two conformations show bimodal mass distributions,
with intensity shifts reflecting interconversion rate between the conformations.
c, Representative mass spectra of peptides from the pore (purple) and TRP
(blue) helices (coloured in the pmTRPM8 semi-swapped structure, right panel)
over HDX times at 4 °C for apo avian (Pm) and human (Hs) channels show bimodal
mass distributions (dark/light) characteristic of the coexistence of two slowly
interconverting populations. Peptides correspond to residues 891–901 (Pm) and
901–911 (Hs) for pore helix, and 982–989 (Pm) and 992–999 (Hs) for TRP helix.
d, Kinetics of deuterium uptake (top) and fraction change (bottom) for the
interconverting populations of peptides described in c. e, Fraction of the slower-
exchanging mass distribution (dark purple or dark-blue peaks in c; presumptive
semi-swapped configuration) increases with menthol at 22 °C (tHDX = 30 s),
demonstrating agonist-dependent population redistribution.
Nature  |  www.nature.com  |  5
These observations are consistent with the heat capacity model for
TRP channel gating described previously9. We therefore expected that
regions providing the main energetic driving force to channel open-
ing should exhibit the most pronounced decrease in standard folding
enthalpy upon cooling (a positive ∆Cp) across the channel’s activation
threshold. Our enthalpic profiles pinpoint the pore helix of human
TPRM8 as such a region (Fig. 4a). The HDX of the pore helix slowed
upon cooling, more dramatically than the rest of the protein or the
avian orthologue, reflecting increased local stability with decreased
temperature (Fig. 4b). Van’t Hoff analysis showed that the pore helix
of the human channel exhibited a pronounced decrease in ∆H° within
the temperature window covering the activation threshold (30–22 °C),
whereas such an effect was much weaker in the avian channel (Fig. 4c,d).
The cold-induced enthalpic stabilization of the pore helix demonstrates
that this region plays a principal role in conferring cold sensitivity to
the human channel.
It has been shown that a single amino acid within the outer pore
region is linked to species-specific cold sensitivity41 (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 7). This residue is invariantly a tyrosine in birds (Y905 for
Pm) and valine in mammals (V915 for Hs) (Fig. 4e). We see that, in the
semi-swapped avian channel, Y905 is nestled within a pocket lined by
a preponderance of charged amino acids (R875, E896, D907, D908)
(Fig. 1e), predicting that this interaction, and thus cold sensitivity of the
avian channel, can be modulated by increasing extracellular pH. Indeed,
calculated pKa values for D907 and D908 (8.16 and 5.43, respectively)
are shifted from their standard values (3.8) or calculated values in the
fully swapped configuration (5.26 and 3.92) (Extended Data Fig. 6).
Consistent with this, we found that cold-evoked responses of HEK293
cells expressing the Pm channel were enhanced markedly as the pH of
the perfusate was increased from 7.4 to 9.0 (Fig. 4f and Supplementary
Fig. 7). In contrast, cells expressing the human channel showed robust
cold-evoked responses throughout this same pH range, with a small but
significant increase observed at higher pH, consistent with the observa-
tion that high extracellular pH weakly modulates mammalian TRPM8
cold sensitivity43 (Fig. 4f). Furthermore, exchanging valine with tyros-
ine (V915Y) converted cold sensitivity of mammalian TRPM8 to more
closely resemble that of the avian channel (Fig. 4f and Supplementary
Fig. 7). This also resulted in a more stable semi-swapped mammalian
channel that can be better resolved with cryo-EM (Extended Data Fig. 2
and Supplementary Table 1). Conversely, the Y905V avian channel
mutant showed enhanced cold sensitivity—a shift that was even more
robust when the entire pore loop consisting of 34 amino acids from
human TRPM8 (V915 to L948) was substituted for the cognate region
of the Pm channel (Extended Data Fig. 7 and Supplementary Fig. 7).
Consistent with these functional results, this chimeric channel shows
enthalpic stabilization in between wild-type avian and human channels
(Extended Data Fig. 7). Together, these findings pinpoint the outer pore
region as a principal nexus for structural and energetic determinants
of temperature sensitivity.
A cold-activated TRPM8 structure
To understand how temperature-dependent energetic changes drive
conformational changes, it is necessary to visualize TRPM8 in a cold-
evoked open state. Our calcium imaging experiments indicate that
destabilizing the species-specific Y905 interface potentiates cold-
evoked responses of the avian channel (Fig. 4f). Indeed, under condi-
tions that favour this state (high pH, 4 °C), we were able to determine
an open state structure in the semi-swapped configuration using
detergent-purified channel protein (Fig. 5). Compared with the semi-
swapped structure obtained at physiologic pH, where the constric-
tion is formed by two residues (L965 and F969) (Fig. 1f), the S6 helix
undergoes an upward translation by one helical turn such that F969
alone now forms the lower constriction (Fig. 5a,b). Concomitantly, the
F969 sidechain is reoriented perpendicular to the plane of the mem-
brane, resulting in a widening of the pore from less than 0.5 to around
2 Å in radius. Furthermore, we observed a strong cation-like density
coordinated in the centre of the F969 side chains, which we interpret as
calcium passing through the gate as it is absent with EGTA (Fig. 5a,c and
Extended Data Fig. 8). These observations indicate that the structure
determined at high pH and low temperature corresponds to a bona fide
cold-evoked open state, where F969 can coordinate permeating ions
through a π-cation cage-like interaction. Such a lower gate configura-
tion is not unprecedented; for example, the calcium-selective channel
TRPV5 forms a permeation pathway involving an analogous tetrameric
arrangement of tryptophan residues44. This configuration differs from
Pm
Hs
1.5
–1.5 kcal mol–1
Residue (TMD)
ΔΔGMenthol – Apo
TRP
helix
c
a
R832
Y995
Y736
F1003
R998
TRP
S1
S2
TRP
S1
S2
Y1005
Y746
R842
F1013
R1008
b
Pm (PDB 9ZCQ)
Hs (PDB 9PB5)
d
Hs, 1,000-FLVQEY-1005
Pm, 990-FLVQEY-995
725
775
825
875
925
975
Apo
Menthol
102
103
104
HDX time (s)
0
25
50
75
100
Deuteration (%)
Pm TRPM8 (EMD-74039)
TRP
VSLD
R832
Y995
Y736
N732
Threshold 0.35
102
103
104
HDX time (s)
Apo
Menthol
Fig. 3 | Menthol binding stabilizes TRP helix. a, Ribbon diagram of VSLD
indicating location of bound menthol molecule with enlarged view highlighting
density of ligand (mesh) and binding pocket (transparent surface). b, Atomic
details of menthol-binding pocket in avian (left) or human (right) channel
showing sidechains forming direct interactions with menthol. Residues are
annotated. c, Changes in folding free energy (∆∆G) for TRPM8 upon menthol
binding at 22 °C. Residue numbers correspond to the avian sequence.
d, Kinetics of deuterium uptake for the TRP helix indicate that menthol binding
stabilizes this region, more so for the avian than the human channel. Solid lines,
stretched-exponential fit of the uptake data. Error bars, s.d. of triplicates.
6  |  Nature  |  www.nature.com
Article
a previously described open state of mouse TRPM8 obtained in the
presence of a cooling compound (cryosim-3) plus an electrophilic
agent (allyl isothiocyanate) and soluble di-C8-phosphoinoside(PI)P2,
in which the gate is formed by a valine residue in S6 with a π-helical
configuration22.
How is destabilization of the Y905 interface coupled with channel
gating? Our structure shows that loss of this interface results in
exposure of buried hydrophobic residues at the S5–S6 region that
are instead stabilized by a presumptive lipid acyl chain invading this
cleft (Fig. 5a,d and Extended Data Fig. 8). The corresponding density
connects to a lipid headgroup occupying a binding site for di-C8-PIP2
described previously22,28, located at the cleft between the pre-S1 region
and the VSLD (Fig. 5d). We therefore designate this density as repre-
senting a PI(4,5)-bisphosphate lipid, consistent with the finding that
endogenous phosphoinositides co-purify with TRPM8 in the absence
of charged amphiphiles22 and that PIP2 is required for channel activa-
tion45,46. When modelled, the length of the protruding acyl chain corre-
sponds to 18:0-20:4 PIP2, which is the predominant, biologically active
species in mammalian plasma membranes47,48. Although the position
of the S6 helix fluctuates in the absence of stimuli, it is stabilized at a
4
22
30
37
Temperature (°C)
3.6
3.4
3.3
3.2
1,000/temperature (K)
5
6
7
8
lnKeq
ΔH° (kcal mol–1)
0
–25
pH 7.40 cold
pH 9 cold
0.1 mM menthol
–0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
****
****
****
****
****
****
Normalized to maximum
calcium response
Pm wild type
pH 7.40 cold
pH 9 cold
0.1 mM menthol
–0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Hs wild type
pH 7.40 cold
pH 9 cold
0.1 mM menthol
–0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Hs V915Y
102
103
104
102
103
104
0
25
50
75
100
Effective HDX time (s)
Deuteration (%)
37 °C
30 °C
22 °C
4 °C
Hs (pore helix)
Pm (pore helix)
Hs (pore helix)
Pm (pore helix)
Hs
Pm
MHR1/2
MHR3
MHR4
VSLD
S5 PH
S6 TRP
CC
a
b
c
d
e
f
Hs
Pm
37–30
30–22
22–4
–30
–20
–10
0
37–30
30–22
22–4
ΔH°
TΔS°
ΔG°
Energy (kcal mol–1)
Temperature interval (°C)
0
0.5
1.0
944
954
Alignment position
Relative frequency
Alignment position 944–954
Y905
1,018
1,028
Alignment position
Alignment position 1,018–1,028
V915
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
Residue number
37–30 °C
30–22 °C
22–4 °C
37–30 °C
30–22 °C
22–4 °C
0
0.5
1.0
Relative frequency
****
****
****
Fig. 4 | The outer pore region confers species-dependent cold sensitivity.
a, Standard folding enthalpy (ΔH°) for Hs or Pm TRPM8 across three temperature
ranges: 37–30 °C, 30–22 °C and 22–4 °C. The coloured box highlights that the
pore helix (PH) in the human channel exhibits a greater ΔH° at the temperature
range spanning the channel’s activation threshold (30–22 °C). This feature is
absent in the avian channel and at other temperature ranges. Residue numbers
correspond to the avian sequence. b, Kinetics of deuterium uptake for
representative peptides in pore helix at different temperatures. The peptides
correspond to the region highlighted in a (Hs, residues 901–911; Pm, residues
891–901). Solid lines, stretched-exponential fit of the uptake data. Effective HDX
times represent labelling times after correcting for the temperature effect on
kchem. c, Van’t Hoff analysis of peptides in b. d, Enthalpy–entropy compensation
of the pore helix upon temperature changes. Thermodynamic parameters in
standard state (25 °C and 1 atm pressure) are derived from the same peptides
in b and c. Error bars in b–d, s.d. of triplicates. e, Sequence logo of Sauropsida
(avian, top) and mammalian TRPM8 (bottom) at the outer pore region
(corresponding to Y905 for Pm or V915 for Hs TRPM8). Relative frequency of
amino acids at alignment positions are represented on the y axis. f, HEK293T
cells expressing avian or human TRPM8, or the ‘avian-ized’ human V915Y
TRPM8 mutant, were exposed to various stimuli, as indicated, and responses
measured with Fura-2 ratiometric calcium dye (normalized to maximal calcium
response following addition of 10 μM ionomycin). Each dot represents a single
cell; n = 40 for Pm, 79 for Hs and 86 for Hs (V915Y). Multi-measure one-way
analysis of variance with Tukey’s post hoc analysis; ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.
lnKeq, natural logarithm of Keq.
Nature  |  www.nature.com  |  7
position upshifted by one helical turn by the full-length arachidonyl
lipid tail of the endogenous PIP2. Consequently, L955 occupies the
lipid-contacting cleft in place of N958 and the acyl chain is nestled
in a pocket formed exclusively by hydrophobic residues (Fig. 5d).
Furthermore, this helical register shift repositions F969 such that the
side chain flips upward, disrupting the tight hydrophobic seal seen in
the closed state (Fig. 5b,c). As in the case of TRPV1 (ref. 49), this analysis
further highlights the importance of examining structures in the pres-
ence of native phosphoinositide lipids, rather than soluble mimetics
such as di-C8-PIP2.
To mitigate concerns about non-specific effects of high pH, we also
determined the structure of the chimeric avian channel containing
the human pore loop under activating conditions (4 °C at neutral pH).
Here we identified a structural subclass representing the same open
gate configuration as seen with the wild-type avian channel at 4 °C and
pH 9 (Extended Data Fig. 7c,d). Furthermore, the outer pore region of
this chimera showed thermodynamic properties closer to those of the
wild-type human channel (Extended Data Fig. 7b).
We also determined the structure of human TRPM8 at 4 °C and neu-
tral pH in vesicles (following pre-incubation at 4 °C or 37 °C), where we
S5–S6
cleft
~5.8 Å
S6
Closed
Open
L965
F969
F969
20
30
40
50
60
0
2
4
6
Position along axis (Å)
Radius (Å)
F969
F969
R841
R988
Y674
W673
N842
S5
S6
F858
F859
L955
N958
L865
F862
a
b
c
d
VSLD
Pore helix
S5
S6
Semi-swapped
Fully swapped
e
z
Pre-S1
VSLD cleft
π
π
α
α
α
α
α
Fig. 5 | Activation of TRPM8 by cold. a, Structural overview of wild-type Pm
TRPM8 in semi-swapped configuration with an open pore determined at 4 °C,
pH 9. b, The S6 helix in the open semi-swapped structure translates upward
by one helical turn when compared with the closed semi-swapped structure;
this is accompanied by sidechain rotation of F969 (left). An open lower gate
constriction is now formed by F969 (middle and right). c, Density and model
of the S6 helix with a coordinated ion in the open lower gate. d, PIP2 lipid
docked into cryo-EM density with close-ups of the hydrophobic S5–S6 cleft and
interactions between the PIP2 headgroup and side chains within the pre-S1 and
VSLD region. e, Schematic model depicting two parallel conformational
pathways of cold-evoked TRPM8 opening in fully (upper) and semi-swapped
(lower) configurations. Closed channels exhibit intrinsic interconversions
between the two configurations. Although S6 of the semi-swapped closed
channel is in α form, S6 of the fully swapped closed channel undergoes π and
α transitions. In both fully and semi-swapped configurations, cold stabilizes
the outer pore region, repositions the α form of S6, allowing the tail of regulatory
PIP2 lipids to stabilize a conformation where the side chain of a phenylalanine at
lower S6 reorients upwards to form a π cage for cation permeation.
8  |  Nature  |  www.nature.com
Article
observed similar features, including an unresolved outer pore loop
interface and open gate configuration. We see both fully and semi-
swapped configurations, but the open state is modelled clearly only in
the former, presumably reflecting the energetic and structural hetero-
geneity of mammalian orthologues in the semi-swapped configuration
(Extended Data Figs. 2 and 8 and Supplementary Table 1). In all cases,
S6 adopts the same α-helical conformation as seen in the avian open
channel as well as a presumptive acyl chain density in the S5–S6 cleft
(Extended Data Fig. 8). We hypothesize that because the Y905 interface
seen in avian TRPM8 is absent in the human channel, binding of PIP2
occurs more readily at lower temperatures, directly facilitating similar
gating rearrangements. At higher temperatures, the intrinsically greater
dynamics of the mammalian channel may destabilize lipid binding to
disfavour the open state. The same open configuration was observed
for either the avian or human channel in the presence of menthol, indi-
cating that although cold and menthol act at opposing ends of the S6
helix, the resulting structural rearrangements converge on a common
gating mechanism (Extended Data Fig. 8 and Supplementary Table 1).
Discussion
Cryo-EM analysis of membrane proteins has evolved to enable the study
of receptors and ion channels without having to first extract them from
their cell membrane environment. In this study, we demonstrate the util-
ity of this approach for capturing conformational states of TRPM8 pre-
viously unresolved by us or others using detergent-extracted protein.
We demonstrate that the semi-swapped architecture inter-converts
with the canonical fully swapped state in a dynamic equilibrium that
is biased by menthol or cold. This was achieved by combining cryo-EM
analysis of cell-derived vesicles with energetic measurements of puri-
fied proteins using HDX–MS.
Our findings are consistent with an emerging consensus that the
dynamic nature of the outer pore and specific protein–lipid interac-
tions are critical factors in specifying the physiological properties of
thermosensitive TRP channels12,14,20,23,50. Differential cold sensitivity
appears to originate from measurable differences in ∆Cp involving
the outer pore loop interface, which is consistent with corresponding
structural differences observed for the human and avian channels. This
indicates that the outer pore region of mammalian channels evolved
with a broader energetic landscape suitable for sensing temperature
over a physiologically relevant thermal range. In any case, our struc-
tures of avian and human TRPM8 indicate that the functional con-
sequence of outer pore loop dynamics is to initiate reconfiguration
of the S6 helix and regulate accessibility of a hydrophobic tunnel by
the long acyl chain of PIP2 as a key regulatory factor (Fig. 5e). In this
regard, PI lipids play an essential role in modulating the activity of
numerous thermosensitive TRP channels51, which is now borne out
by this and other structural studies demonstrating how the binding
of PIP2 or other PI species facilitate (for example, TRPM8) or inhibit
(for example, TRPV1) temperature activation49.
Our results further indicate that opening of the lower gate requires
that S6 adopt a full α-helical configuration, which, in the avian channel,
is stabilized in the semi-swapped state. In contrast, a π-helical configu-
ration is observed only in the fully swapped channel structure, prob-
ably posing a higher energetic barrier to gating. In any case, a unifying
observation is that gate opening requires transition from the π to the α
configuration, which can occur in the fully swapped configuration by
a single-residue register shift in the lower half of the S6 helix, akin to
what is seen in TRPV1, or during transition from fully to semi-swapped
configurations. Although our data indicate that the fully swapped
channel has a higher energetic barrier to making the gating transi-
tion, the transition between fully and semi-swapped states is not the
gating step per se. Rather, each state can converge on the same open
S6 configuration. Together with energetic measurements by HDX, we
propose a free energy landscape describing the conformational states
observed structurally by cryo-EM (Extended Data Fig. 9). In the case of
avian TRPM8, the stabilizing Y905 interface (Fig. 1e) traps the channel
kinetically in a closed semi-swapped state, making the channel insensi-
tive to cold. However, avian TRPM8 channels do show some weak cold
sensitivity, which our results indicate arises from the opening of chan-
nels in the fully swapped state, where the Y905 interface is not formed.
Thus, the existence of the semi-swapped state provides a molecular
explanation for species-specific differences in cold sensitivity, at least
in regard to birds versus mammals.
Our structures indicate that the interconversion between fully and
semi-swapped states requires the movement of pore domains from
all four sub-units, which can occur within the confines of the intact
tetrameric architecture (Supplementary Video 1). As such, it is not
surprising that reconstructions from a significant proportion of par-
ticles in our datasets are characterized by an unresolved pore domain
within an otherwise well-resolved full-length channel structure. This
phenomenon may explain why previously published25 and numerous
unpublished TRPM8 structures from our own studies lack resolution
in this region and thus failed to resolve significant conformational
changes associated with agonist binding. Such reconstructions are
often discarded from further analysis, but our results indicate that
they may reflect functionally relevant, dynamic movements. This
realization motivates an emerging goal in single-particle cryo-EM,
namely, to understand the dynamic processes underlying physiologic
function, rather than simply pursuing the highest resolution struc-
tures. Similarly, energetic measurements using techniques such as
differential scanning calorimetry have provided valuable insights into
enthalpic changes associated with TRP channel gating but do so for the
channel in toto. In contrast, HDX–MS provides energetic information
about specific protein segments, which, in combination with recent
advances in cryo-EM, brings us closer to achieving a holistic analysis of
temperature-sensitive ion channel function, as we demonstrate here
for the cold sensor, TRPM8.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10276-2.
1.
Julius, D. TRP channels and pain. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 29, 355–384 (2013).
2.
Vriens, J., Nilius, B. & Voets, T. Peripheral thermosensation in mammals. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
15, 573–589 (2014).
3.
Kashio, M. & Tominaga, M. TRP channels in thermosensation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 75,
102591 (2022).
4.
Bautista, D. M. et al. The menthol receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmental
cold. Nature 448, 204–208 (2007).
5.
Colburn, R. W. et al. Attenuated cold sensitivity in TRPM8 null mice. Neuron 54, 379–386
(2007).
6.
Dhaka, A. et al. TRPM8 is required for cold sensation in mice. Neuron 54, 371–378 (2007).
7.
Nadezhdin, K. D. et al. Structural mechanism of heat-induced opening of a temperature-
sensitive TRP channel. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 28, 564–572 (2021).
8.
Kwon, D. H. et al. Heat-dependent opening of TRPV1 in the presence of capsaicin. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 28, 554–563 (2021).
9.
Clapham, D. E. & Miller, C. A thermodynamic framework for understanding temperature
sensing by transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108,
19492–19497 (2011).
10.
Mugo, A. N., Chou, R. & Qin, F. Protein dynamics underlies strong temperature dependence
of heat receptors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 122, e2406318121 (2025).
11.
Mugo, A. et al. A suicidal mechanism for the exquisite temperature sensitivity of TRPV1.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 120, e2300305120 (2023).
12.
Myers, B. R., Bohlen, C. J. & Julius, D. A yeast genetic screen reveals a critical role for the
pore helix domain in TRP channel gating. Neuron 58, 362–373 (2008).
13.
Liu, B. & Qin, F. Single-residue molecular switch for high-temperature dependence of
vanilloid receptor TRPV3. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 1589–1594 (2017).
14.
Grandl, J. et al. Temperature-induced opening of TRPV1 ion channel is stabilized by the
pore domain. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 708–714 (2010).
15.
Cordero-Morales, J. F., Gracheva, E. O. & Julius, D. Cytoplasmic ankyrin repeats of transient
receptor potential A1 (TRPA1) dictate sensitivity to thermal and chemical stimuli. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 108, E1184–E1191 (2011).
Nature  |  www.nature.com  |  9
16.
Prescott, E. D. & Julius, D. A modular PIP2 binding site as a determinant of capsaicin
receptor sensitivity. Science 300, 1284–1288 (2003).
17.
Brauchi, S., Orta, G., Salazar, M., Rosenmann, E. & Latorre, R. A hot-sensing cold receptor:
C-terminal domain determines thermosensation in transient receptor potential channels.
J. Neurosci. 26, 4835–4840 (2006).
18.
Singh, A. K. et al. Structural basis of temperature sensation by the TRP channel TRPV3.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 994–998 (2019).
19.
Kim, M. et al. Evidence that the TRPV1 S1-S4 membrane domain contributes to
thermosensing. Nat. Commun. 11, 4169 (2020).
20.	 Zhang, F. et al. Heat activation is intrinsic to the pore domain of TRPV1. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 115, E317–E324 (2018).
21.
Fernandez, J. A. et al. Voltage- and cold-dependent gating of single TRPM8 ion channels.
J. Gen. Physiol. 137, 173–195 (2011).
22.	 Yin, Y. et al. Activation mechanism of the mouse cold-sensing TRPM8 channel by cooling
agonist and PIP(2). Science 378, eadd1268 (2022).
23.	 Zhang, K., Julius, D. & Cheng, Y. Structural snapshots of TRPV1 reveal mechanism of
polymodal functionality. Cell 184, 5138–5150 (2021).
24.	 Diver, M. M., Cheng, Y. & Julius, D. Structural insights into TRPM8 inhibition and
desensitization. Science 365, 1434–1440 (2019).
25.	 Yin, Y. et al. Structure of the cold- and menthol-sensing ion channel TRPM8. Science 359,
237–241 (2018).
26.	 Palchevskyi, S. et al. Structure of human TRPM8 channel. Commun. Biol. 6, 1065 (2023).
27.
Zhao, C. et al. Structures of a mammalian TRPM8 in closed state. Nat. Commun. 13, 3113
(2022).
28.	 Yin, Y. et al. Structural basis of cooling agent and lipid sensing by the cold-activated TRPM8
channel. Science 363, eaav9334 (2019).
29.	 Tao, X., Zhao, C. & MacKinnon, R. Membrane protein isolation and structure determination
in cell-derived membrane vesicles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 120, e2302325120
(2023).
30.	 Fu, Z. & MacKinnon, R. Structure of the flotillin complex in a native membrane environment.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 121, e2409334121 (2024).
31.
Yin, Y. & Lee, S. Y. Current view of ligand and lipid recognition by the menthol receptor
TRPM8. Trends Biochem. Sci. 45, 806–819 (2020).
32.	 Yin, Y. et al. Mechanisms of sensory adaptation and inhibition of the cold and menthol
receptor TRPM8. Sci. Adv. 10, eadp2211 (2024).
33.	 Whicher, J. R. & MacKinnon, R. Structure of the voltage-gated K(+) channel Eag1 reveals
an alternative voltage sensing mechanism. Science 353, 664–669 (2016).
34.	 Tao, X. & MacKinnon, R. Cryo-EM structure of the KvAP channel reveals a non-domain-
swapped voltage sensor topology. eLife 8, e52164 (2019).
35.	 Zubcevic, L. & Lee, S. Y. The role of pi-helices in TRP channel gating. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
58, 314–323 (2019).
36.	 Bai, Y., Milne, J. S., Mayne, L. & Englander, S. W. Protein stability parameters measured by
hydrogen exchange. Proteins 20, 4–14 (1994).
37.
Hamuro, Y. Quantitative hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. J. Am. Soc.
Mass. Spectrom. 32, 2711–2727 (2021).
38.	 Stofella, M. et al. Computational tools for hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry data analysis. Chem. Rev. 124, 12242–12263 (2024).
39.	 Bandell, M. et al. High-throughput random mutagenesis screen reveals TRPM8 residues
specifically required for activation by menthol. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 493–500 (2006).
40.	 Xu, L. et al. Molecular mechanisms underlying menthol binding and activation of TRPM8
ion channel. Nat. Commun. 11, 3790 (2020).
41.
Yang, S. et al. A paradigm of thermal adaptation in penguins and elephants by tuning
cold activation in TRPM8. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 8633–8638 (2020).
42.	 Myers, B. R., Sigal, Y. M. & Julius, D. Evolution of thermal response properties in a cold-
activated TRP channel. PLoS ONE 4, e5741 (2009).
43.	 Andersson, D. A., Chase, H. W. & Bevan, S. TRPM8 activation by menthol, icilin, and
cold is differentially modulated by intracellular pH. J. Neurosci. 24, 5364–5369 (2004).
44.	 Dang, S. et al. Structural insight into TRPV5 channel function and modulation. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 116, 8869–8878 (2019).
45.	 Liu, B. & Qin, F. Functional control of cold- and menthol-sensitive TRPM8 ion channels by
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. J. Neurosci. 25, 1674–1681 (2005).
46.	 Rohacs, T., Lopes, C. M., Michailidis, I. & Logothetis, D. E. PI(4,5)P2 regulates the activation
and desensitization of TRPM8 channels through the TRP domain. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
626–634 (2005).
47.	 Batrouni, A. G. & Baskin, J. M. The chemistry and biology of phosphatidylinositol
4-phosphate at the plasma membrane. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 40, 116190 (2021).
48.	 Suh, B. C. & Hille, B. PIP2 is a necessary cofactor for ion channel function: how and why?.
Annu. Rev. Biophys. 37, 175–195 (2008).
49.	 Arnold, W. R. et al. Structural basis of TRPV1 modulation by endogenous bioactive lipids.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 31, 1377–1385 (2024).
50.	 Gao, Y., Cao, E., Julius, D. & Cheng, Y. TRPV1 structures in nanodiscs reveal mechanisms
of ligand and lipid action. Nature 534, 347–351 (2016).
51.
Rohacs, T. Phosphoinositide regulation of TRP channels: a functional overview in the
structural era. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 86, 329–355 (2024).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026
Article
Methods
Cloning, cell culture and protein expression
N-terminally fused mEGFP constructs of TRPM8 were obtained using
Gibson assembly to sub-clone TRPM8 genes into a pFastBac1 vector.
Mutagenesis was carried out by either PCR with mutagenic primers,
or by Gibson assembly, with Q5 high-fidelity polymerase. Construct
sequences were verified using Sanger sequencing and whole-plasmid
sequencing. Expi293F cells were maintained at 37 °C with 8% ambient
CO2 and grown to a density of 3–3.5 × 106 cells ml−1. To transduce cells
for protein overexpression, a baculovirus (generated from two rounds
of viral amplification in SF9 cells, according to known protocols) for the
N-terminally fused mEGFP Pm or Hs TRPM8 with a human rhinovirus
3C proteolysis site was added dropwise, for a final concentration of
5–10% (vol%/vol%) to the flask while gently mixing the culture. Bacu-
loviruses used in mammalian cell cultures were sequenced routinely
by amplifying the coding region using PCR (M13 primer sites), gel
extracting the amplicon and subjecting the purified DNA fragments
to Sanger sequencing. Virally transduced Expi293F cultures were left
at 37 °C with 8% CO2 for 16 h. To boost expression, the cultures were
supplemented with 10 mM sodium butyrate and transferred to an
incubator at 30 °C with 5% CO2 and allowed to incubate for a total of
72 h (post-transduction). Cells were then collected by centrifugation
(3,000g, 10 min, 4 °C), washed once with 1× Dulbecco’s phosphate
buffered saline (DPBS) pH 7.40 by gently resuspending the cell pellet,
and collected by centrifugation (3,000g, 10 min, 4 °C). Cell pellets were
flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept in a −80 °C freezer until use.
Detergent purification for HDX–MS and cryo-EM samples
All purification steps were carried out at 4 °C or over ice, unless
otherwise noted. The avian or human TRPM8 channel was purified
with the same general protocol. Briefly, a cell pellet grown from 0.5 l
Expi293F cell culture (typically 7–10 g in total) was resuspended into
lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 μg ml−1
DNase I, 10 μg ml−1 RNase, 0.2 mM AEBSF, 50 μg ml−1 soy trypsin inhibi-
tor, 10 μg ml−1 leupeptin, 10 μg ml−1 pepstatin, 1 mM benzamidine-HCl
and aprotinin) for a total dilution of 4:1 lysis buffer:cell pellet. The
resuspension was adjusted to 0.5% lauryl maltose neopentyl glycol
(LMNG)/0.5% glycodiosgenin (GDN), and rotated gently for 1 h at 4 °C.
After centrifugation (35,000g, 30 min, 4 °C), the lysate was applied
to 1 ml anti-GFP-nanobody-conjugated Sepharose 4B resin (prepared
in-house) for 2 h at 4 °C with gentle rotation. The TRPM8-bound resin
was washed extensively with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.40,
150 mM NaCl, 0.05% GDN), then digested in the presence of 10 μg ml−1
PreScission protease (prepared in-house) along with 1 mM dithiothrei-
tol for 2 h. The eluate was concentrated to 0.2 ml and injected onto a
Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column pre-equilibrated in SEC buffer
(20 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.40, 150 mM NaCl, 0.005% GDN). For the Pm
structures obtained at pH 9, cells were resuspended into lysis buffer
containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 9.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2, 50 μg ml−1
DNase I, 10 μg ml−1 RNase, 0.2 mM AEBSF, 50 μg ml−1 soy trypsin inhibi-
tor, 10 μg ml−1 leupeptin, 10 μg ml−1 pepstatin, 1 mM benzamidine-HCl
and aprotinin. The resuspended cells were extracted using 0.5%
LMNG/0.5% GDN and further purified with anti-GFP nanobody resin.
For cryo-EM, the final sample buffer contained 20 mM TRIS pH 9.00,
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2 and 0.0025% GDN.
Cell vesicle purification for cryo-EM
A cell pellet grown from 1.0 l Expi293F cell culture (typically 20–25 g
in total) was resuspended into lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-NaOH
pH 7.40, 300 mM KCl) supplemented with 2 mM CaCl2, 50 μg ml−1
DNase I, 10 μg ml−1 RNase, 0.2 mM AEBSF, 50 μg ml−1 soy trypsin inhibi-
tor, 10 μg ml−1 leupeptin, 10 μg ml−1 pepstatin, 1 mM benzamidine-
HCl, and aprotinin. The mixture was homogenized roughly using
a Dounce homogenizer over ice, and the resuspended cells were
adjusted to a final volume of 200 ml. The cells were transferred to a
metal beaker over ice and lysed using a probe-tip sonicator (2 min total,
5 s on/15 s off, 60% amplitude). The lysate was clarified by centrifuga-
tion (12,000g, 15 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was filtered imme-
diately through a 0.8-μm mixed cellulose acetate filter. The filtrate was
then passed through a 10-ml bed of ion exchange resin (Q-Sepharose
FastFlow, Cytiva) packed in a gravity column and pre-equilibrated in
lysis buffer. The flowthrough was collected and adjusted to 0.5 mM
fluorinated fos-choline 8 (Anatrace), which is below its critical micelle
concentration of around 3 mM, for a final volume of 240 ml. Vesicles
were batch bound to 5 ml anti-GFP nanobody Sepharose 4B resin
(prepared in-house) for 2 h at 4 °C with constant rotation. After bind-
ing, the resin was collected by centrifugation (500g, 1 min) and trans-
ferred to a gravity column. The affinity resin was washed extensively,
and the resuspended beads were adjusted to 10 μg ml−1 PreScission
protease (prepared in-house) along with 1 mM dithiothreitol. Bound
vesicles were eluted by proteolysis for 2 h, and the eluate was collected
and concentrated using an Amicon ultra-centrifugal filter (100 kDa,
regenerated cellulose) to a final volume of 0.5 ml. After brief cen-
trifugation (10,000g, 2 min, 4 °C), the sample was injected onto a
Superose 6 Increase 10/300 column (Cytiva) pre-equilibrated with
the same elution buffer. The void volume peak (typically 8.5–9 ml)
was pooled and concentrated to 30 μl using a 0.5-ml Amicon ultra-
centrifugal filter (100 kDa, regenerated cellulose) and kept on ice.
Concentrated vesicle samples were used immediately for or warmed
to 37 °C for 5–10 min before cryo-EM sample preparation.
Cryo-EM grid preparation, screening and data collection
Cryo-EM grids for vesicle samples were prepared using either Quantifoil
R1.2/1.3 400 mesh holey carbon grids, Quantifoil R1.2/1.3 300 mesh
holy carbon grids coated with ultrathin continuous carbon. Detergent
samples were prepared using Quantifoil Au R1.2/1.3 300 mesh holey
carbon grids. Grids were glow discharged (15 mA, 30 s) and placed
in a Vitrobot Mark IV (FEI Company) set at 4 °C with 100% humidity.
For vesicle samples, 2.5 μl concentrated sample was applied directly
to grids and, after 5 s of incubation, grids were blotted for 2–5 s and
plunge-frozen immediately in liquid ethane cooled in a Dewar of liquid
nitrogen. To obtain menthol-bound datasets, vesicles were kept at
4 °C for Pm TRPM8 or ambient temperature (21–24 °C) for the human
channel, and a final concentration of 1 mM menthol was added from a
stock of 200 mM menthol dissolved in 100% ethanol. After mixing the
menthol-treated samples gently at respective temperatures, samples
were applied to grids, for a total agonist treatment time of 2–15 min.
For detergent samples, 2.5 μl of purified TRPM8 concentrated to
14–16 mg ml−1 was applied directly to grids and, after 10 s of incuba-
tion, grids were blotted for 5 s before vitrifying. Grids were transferred
and stored under liquid nitrogen until screening or data collection.
Grids were screened with a Talos Arctica or Glacios 200 kV cryo-TEM
(ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a K3 direct detector camera
(GATAN), and screening datasets were obtained using SerialEM. Data
were collected at the University of California San Francisco (UCSF)
Cryo-EM Facility with a Titan Krios cryo-TEM equipped with a K3 camera
and Bio Quantum post-column energy filter (counting mode pixel size
of 0.8189 Å per pixel after 2× Fourier binning) or at the Janelia Cryo-EM
Facility on a Krios equipped with a cold field-emission gun, Selectris X
energy filter and Falcon 4i camera (physical pixel size of 0.94). For data
collection at UCSF, the zero-loss energy selection slit was set to 10 eV.
For vesicle datasets, the target defocus was set at −1.0 to −2.5 µm and,
for detergent datasets, the target defocus was set at −0.5 to −2.0 µm.
Cryo-EM data processing and refinement
Dose-weighted, motion-corrected micrographs were obtained using
MotionCor2 (ref. 52) and Fourier cropped by a factor of two, or by pre-
processing using cryoSPARC53. An initial model of Pm TRPM8 in a mem-
brane was generated in cryoSPARC with a screening dataset obtained on
a Glacios cryo-TEM (2,420 micrographs) and refined to approximately
5 Å (440 pixel box size, 0.73 Å per pixel). This initial reconstruction
was used to generate a reference volume using relion_image_handler
(512 pixel box size, 0.8189 Å per pixel) that was subsequently used in
template picking for further processing of datasets obtained on the
Krios microscopes. For the vesicle datasets, particles were identified
using a combination of Topaz particle picking54 and template picking in
cryoSPARC, followed by several rounds of heterogeneous refinement
and two-dimensional classification to deplete non-TRPM8 or obvious
junk particles. After generating a consensus refinement with cryoSPARC
non-uniform refinement, further classification was carried out in either
RELION5 (ref. 55) or cryoSPARC. Three-dimensional classification used
either a mask capturing only the channel region, or a spherical mask
to limit bilayer signal. Further two-dimensional classification of three-
dimensional refinements without a circular mask revealed that a range
of membrane curvatures are included in reconstructions, indicating
that, in our datasets, three-dimensional classes result from a distri-
bution, rather than specific, membrane curvatures (Supplementary
Fig. 1c). For the GDN-purified TRPM8 datasets, an initial reference map
was generated from each dataset ab initio from particles identified with
blob picker in cryoSPARC from a small sub-set of the micrographs. The
ab initio model was then subjected to non-uniform refinement without
symmetry and used subsequently to generate templates to process
the remaining dataset. After several rounds of heterogeneous refine-
ment, a consensus refinement was generated in cryoSPARC for further
three-dimensional classification with cryoSPARC. Three-dimensional
class averages were subjected to non-uniform refinement using cryo­
SPARC. Local resolution estimation of refined maps was carried out in
cryoSPARC and visualized in UCSF ChimeraX.
Model building, pore radius and pKa calculations
For the unliganded Pm semi-swapped structure, an initial atomic model
was generated de novo using ModelAngelo (RELION v.5)56, which pro-
vided initial coordinates that defined the connectivity of the outer
pore loop, S6 and TRP domain. This model was refined iteratively
using Phenix real space refinement and manual refinement in COOT57
to assess density fit. Initial atomic models of Pm or Hs TRPM8 were
either generated de novo or sourced from previously published struc-
tures (Extended Data Table 1). Representative densities from various
regions of the corresponding reconstruction fitted with atomic mod-
els are shown in Supplementary Figs. 9–12. All models were validated
using MolProbity in Phenix58. Refinement statistics of cryo-EM maps
and model statistics are provided in Extended Data Table 1. A video
morphing between the semi- and fully swapped models shown as a
space-filling models was generated by interpolating the two PDBs (PDBs
9P90 and 9P91) using the morph command in UCSF ChimeraX (Sup-
plementary Video 1). The HOLE program59 was used to determine all
pore radii for modelled structures. For pKa calculations, models of the
Pm semi-swapped closed (PDB 9P91) or fully swap closed/desensitized
(PDB 9P90) structures obtained in vesicles were used as inputs for
PROPKA3 (ref. 60). A summary of pKa values for ionizable amino acids
found on the extracellular region is provided in Extended Data Fig. 6.
Hydrogen–deuterium exchange
Supplementary Table 3 summarizes biochemical and statistical details
for HDX in this study. HDX was initiated by diluting 2 μl of 10–25 μM
GDN-solubilized TRPM8 stock in an H2O buffer into 28 μl of a matching
deuterated buffer to reach 93% D-content. Labelling was conducted at
pH measured in deuterated solvent (pD)read 7.0 and temperatures of
4 °C, 22 °C, 30 °C or 37 °C. Labelling times were adjusted to account
for the temperature dependence of intrinsic rates (kchem) based on the
average kchem of the full sequence61, with details presented in Supple-
mentary Table 3. For HDX in the presence of menthol, two conditions
were employed: (1) 1 mM menthol was added to HEK293 cells express-
ing TRPM8 and maintained throughout purification and exchange;
(2) TRPM8 was purified without menthol, and 1 mM menthol was added
only to the D2O buffer. Under both conditions, HDX was performed at
22 °C. HDX time-points were collected in triplicate.
HDX was quenched at time-points ranging from 3 s to 3 days by add-
ing 30 μl of ice-cold quench buffer (600 mM glycine, 8 M urea, 0.005%
GDN, pH 2.5). Quenched samples were incubated on ice for 20 s, further
diluted with 50 μl quench buffer without urea and injected immediately
into a valve system maintained at 5 °C (Trajan LEAP). Non-deuterated
controls and MS/MS runs for peptide assignment followed the same
protocol, except that D2O buffers were replaced by H2O buffers, with
immediate quenching and injection. HDX reactions were performed in
random order. No peptide carryover was observed as assessed by inject-
ing quench buffer containing 2 M urea and 0.005% GDN. In-exchange
controls accounting for forward deuteration towards 41.5% D in the
quenched reaction were performed by mixing D2O buffer and ice-cold
quench buffer before protein addition. Maximally labelled controls (‘All
D’) accounting for back-exchange were performed by incubating sam-
ples in D2O buffer for 24 h at 22 °C, followed by a 1-h heat shock at 48 °C.
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis for the first rep-
licate and selected time-points for the second replicate was performed
on instruments at University of California Berkeley (Marqusee labora-
tory), whereas the remaining time-points of replicate two and all of rep-
licate three were analysed at UCSF (Cheng laboratory) using the same
columns but different liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
instrumentation. We note that, due to differences in the liquid chro-
matography dead volumes, the retention times for peptides analysed
at UCSF were systematically around 12 s longer than runs analysed at
University of California Berkeley and, therefore, different integration
bounds were used when analysing the mass spectra for those two data
sets. Nonetheless, the two data sets showed high agreement in deu-
teration levels, as demonstrated in the repeatability assessments in
Supplementary Fig. 8 and Supplementary Table 3.
Upon injection, the protein was digested online using a NepII/pep-
sin protease column (Affipro, catalogue no. AP-PC-006) at 10 °C. The
resulting peptides were desalted by flowing across a hand-packed trap
column (Thermo Scientific POROS R2 resin, catalogue no. 1112906, with
IDEX C-128 1-mm internal diameter × 2-cm cartridge) at 5 °C. Digestion
and desalting were completed in 2.5 min at 100 μl min−1 of 0.1% formic
acid. Peptides were then separated on a C18 analytical column (Waters
ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm × 50 mm, catalogue no.
186002344) with a 17-min linear gradient of 5–45% (vol/vol) acetoni-
trile (0.1% formic acid) delivered by a Thermo UltiMate-3000 pump
(University of California Berkeley) or Vanquish Neo pump (UCSF).
Eluted peptides were analysed on a Thermo Q Exactive (UC-Berkeley)
or Q Exactive Plus (UCSF) mass spectrometer in positive mode (full
mass spectrometry: resolution 140,000, automatic gain control target
3 × 106, maximum injection time 200 ms, scan range 300–2,000 m/z;
dd-MS2: resolution 17,500, automatic gain control target 2 × 105, maxi-
mum injection time 100 ms, loop count 10, isolation window 2.0 m/z,
normalized collision energy 28, dynamic exclusion 15 s).
HDX–MS data analysis and EX2 characterization
Peptides were identified using SearchGUI (v.4.0.25) and Byonic (Protein
Metrics) against a search library containing TRPM8, ten additional
proteins previously exposed to liquid chromatography–mass spec-
trometry and their reserved sequences as decoys. Search parameters
included unspecific digestion, precursor and fragment tolerance of
10 ppm, precursor charge 1–8 and peptide length 5–50. HDX data were
processed in HDExaminer v.3.4 (Trajan), with bimodal fitting accepted
when the score exceeded the unimodal score by 0.1 or above.
The observed exchange occurred through EX2 kinetics, reporting
on the equilibrium instead of opening rates of amide protons. The
identification of EX2 behaviour is supported by (1) the continuous
Article
shifts in the isotopic envelopes towards higher m/z with exchange time
(Supplementary Fig. 2); (2) the difference in kobs for TRPM8 labelled at
various pD conditions can be attributed solely to the effect of pD on
kchem (Supplementary Fig. 3). For peptides exhibiting bimodal mass
envelopes, each envelope increases in mass over labelling time with
exchange rates slower than kchem, and the kobs for both envelopes show
pD-dependence consistent with EX2 kinetics, indicating that the two
mass envelopes represent two kinetically distinct populations that each
exchange through EX2 kinetics (rather than EX1 or carryover)62 (Supple-
mentary Figs. 3 and 4). To cross-validate those bimodal fits, mass spec-
tra were exported to HX-Express3 (ref. 63) for double-binomial fitting,
with an F-test to assess the increase in fit quality over a single-binomial
model. Bimodality was accepted when P < 0.01. Fitting was repeated
with 20 iterations using a resampling approach in which random noise
(±30% of each isotope peak intensity) was introduced in each iteration
(Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6).
Each isotopic distribution was inspected manually for fit quality.
Deuteration levels were adjusted for 93% D-content and back-exchange.
Except for Fig. 2, for peptides displaying clear bimodality, deuteration
levels represent centroids of unimodal fit to represent the overall HDX
for two populations.
Quantifying thermodynamic parameters from HDX–MS
H–D exchange follows the Linderstrøm–Lang model described by the
following scheme
N −H
O = C
N −H
N −D
k
k
k
closed
open
exchanged
close
open
chem
⋯
⇄
⟶
where kopen and kclose are the opening and closing rates of hydrogen
bonds for individual amides, and kchem is the chemical exchange rate of
the amide in an unstructured polypeptide. At steady-state, the observed
H–D exchange rate can then be described as
k
k
k
k
k
k
=
+
+
obs
open
chem
open
close
chem
As peptides in our dataset all exhibited EX2 kinetics (see ‘HDX–MS
data analysis and EX2 characterization’), where kchem « kclose,
k
k
k
k
k
k
K
=
+
=
+ 1
obs
open
chem
open
close
chem
eq
where Keq = kclose/kopen and describes the equilibrium constant of
H-bond closing and opening (folding). Folding free energy (ΔG) is
then described as




G
K
k
k
k
k
Δ
= −RTln
= −RTln
−1 ≈−RTln
eq
chem
obs
chem
obs
As kchem can be calculated reliably from the sequence of the peptide61,
measurement of the H–D exchange rate (kobs) enables direct quanti-
fication of ΔG at peptide level. In this study, a stretched-exponential
method was used to estimate ΔG from HDX as described by Hamuro37.
Briefly, deuteration levels for each peptide were fit with the following
equation:
D t
kt
% ( ) = 1 −exp[(−
) ]
b
where k is the exchange rate, and b is the stretch factor that describes
variations of k for residues within the peptide. In those calculations,
peptides with exchange rates beyond the measurement range of this
study were assigned fixed values: peptides fully exchanged at the first
time-point (30 s) were assigned kchem = 10 s−1, whereas peptides with
no exchange at the final time-point (30 h) were assigned kobs = 10−5 s−1.
Changes in folding free energy (ΔΔG) under two conditions (with
and without menthol) were then calculated based on the following
equation:










G
γ
B
B
k
k
ΔΔ
= −ln(10)RT −ln(10)
1 −1
−log
1
2
10
1
2
where γ is the Euler–Mascheroni constant (approximately 0.577215665).
For Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 5a, an average difference of deu-
teration levels was used to estimate the ΔΔG at temperatures relative
to 22 °C, as described by Hamuro37, as some regions exhibited incom-
plete exchange within our labelling times, which resulted in low con-
fidence in fitting results with the stretched-exponential method. In
this strategy, ΔΔG was calculated based on the following equation:
∑
G
W
p
D
D
ΔΔ
= −ln(10)RT
(%
−%
)
t
p
t
t
=1
1,
2,
where p is the number of time-points and t is a specific time-point.
For each temperature window, van’t Hoff analysis was employed to
determine ∆H°, entropy contribution (TΔS°) and Gibbs free energy
(ΔG°) extrapolated to 25 °C, assuming no change in Cp, based on the
following equation:
K
H
R T
S
R
ln
= −Δ
° 1 + Δ °
eq
In both quantification strategies, residue-level ΔΔG and ∆H° values
were determined from a weighted average of peptide-level parameters,
excluding the first two N-terminal residues due to rapid back-exchange.
We note that not all peptides identified exhibited complete exchange
within our labelling times and, therefore, the thermodynamic param-
eters quantified here represent the best approximation within the scope
of the study. Nonetheless, our approach effectively captures relative
energetic changes associated with menthol-binding and temperature
changes that are consistent with our structural and functional studies.
Fura-2-AM calcium imaging and data analysis
Calcium imaging experiments were carried using Fura-2-AM as a ratio-
metric fluorescent indicator (as described previously64) with tempera-
ture monitoring throughout imaging. Briefly, adherent HEK293T cells
grown at 37 °C with 5% ambient CO2 were seeded in a 12-well plate (1 ml
volume) to a final density of 30–40% confluence and transfected with
0.5 mg ml−1 plasmid using Lipofectamine 3000 (ThermoFisher Scien-
tific) according to the manufacturer. Cells were allowed to transfect for
12–14 h. Borosilicate cover slips (12 mm, Bellco Glass) were incubated
with a 1:100 solution of Matrigel matrix (Corning) prepared in serum-
free DMEM (Gibco) for 1 h, then washed once with DMEM and left in a
24-well plate with DMEM supplemented with 10% bovine calf serum.
Transfected cells were dissociated gently and replated directly onto
coverslips and allowed to attach for 2–3 h before imaging experiments
were carried out. Attached cells were washed once with Ringer’s solu-
tion (10 mM HEPES-Tris pH 7.40, 140 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2,
2 mM MgCl2, 10 mM glucose; 290–310 mmol kg−1), and then incubated
for 0.5 h at room temperature in the dark in Ringer’s solution supple-
mented with 10 μg ml−1 Fura-2-AM (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 0.02%
Pluronic F127. After incubation, cells were washed once with Ringer’s
solution and allowed to incubate further in Ringer’s solution without
Fura-2-AM or Pluronic F127 for 0.5 h. Dye-loaded cells were then imaged
using an inverted microscope with 340 and 380 nm excitation (Sut-
ter, Lambda LS Illuminator). The temperature for each experiment
was held at 32–37 °C by perfusing Ringer’s solution through a Peltier
device controlled with a heating module (Warner TC-324B) calibrated
to hold the desired temperature continuously. Cells were held at this
temperature range for 5–10 min before each recording. Bath exchange
into low temperatures was achieved by perfusing Ringer’s solution
cooled with ice water into the recording chamber. Temperature was
monitored and synchronized using a thermistor reading input to the
heating module that was digitized through an Axon Digidata 1550B
module and monitored with pCLAMP10. Recordings were obtained
as stacked videos of individual 340/380 frames with a 1-s interval in
Micro-Manager65. Videos of ratio images were calculated with an ImageJ
macro script according to known procedures66. Peak amplitudes of
calcium signals corresponding to either cold or menthol, were obtained
and normalized to maximum calcium signal obtained using 10 µM
ionomycin before further statistical analyses.
Sequence alignment of TRPM8 orthologues
Sequences of avian or mammalian TRPM8 were obtained from OrthoDB
v.12.2 (orthodb.org) by curating the phylogenetic clades of Sauropsida
(which includes avian species), and Mammalia, respectively. Multiple
sequence alignments were generated for Sauropsida (450 sequences)
and Mammalia (390 sequences) using Clustal Omega (https://www.ebi.
ac.uk/jdispatcher/msa/clustalo). The resulting outputs were used to
plot individual sequence logo representations of the avian or mam-
malian TRPM8 orthologues near Y905 (for Pm TRPM8) or V915 (for Hs
TRPM8) using R (ggseqlogo)67.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All plasmids used in this study have been deposited with AddGene for
distribution. Cryo-EM maps and atomic models have been deposited in
the EMDB and PDB as follows: Pm TRPM8 semi-swapped, closed, unli-
ganded, CaCl2-free, 4 °C adapted in cell vesicles: EMD-71395, PDB 9P91;
Pm TRPM8 fully swapped, closed/desensitized, unliganded, CaCl2-free,
4 °C adapted in cell vesicles: EMD-71394, PDB 9P90; Pm TRPM8 fully
swapped, closed, unliganded, CaCl2-free, 4 °C adapted in cell vesicles:
EMD-71352, PDB 9P7S; Pm TRPM8 undetermined example class 1, unli-
ganded, CaCl2-free, 4 °C adapted in cell vesicles: EMD-74126; Pm TRPM8
undetermined example class 2, unliganded, CaCl2-free, 4 °C adapted in
cell vesicles: EMD-74127; Pm TRPM8 fully swapped, closed, unliganded,
5 mM CaCl2, 4 °C adapted in cell vesicles: EMD-74036, PDB 9ZCN; Pm
TRPM8 semi-swapped, closed, unliganded, 5 mM CaCl2, 4 °C adapted in
cell vesicles: EMD-74037, PDB 9ZCO; Pm TRPM8 fully swapped, closed,
menthol, CaCl2-free in cell vesicles: EMD-74038, PDB 9ZCP; Pm TRPM8
semi-swapped, closed, menthol, CaCl2-free in cell vesicles: EMD-74039,
PDB 9ZCQ; Pm TRPM8 semi-swapped, open, menthol, CaCl2-free in cell
vesicles: EMD-74123, PDB 9ZEZ; Pm TRPM8 fully swapped, closed, puta-
tive desensitized menthol, CaCl2-free in cell vesicles: EMD-74125; Pm
TRPM8 semi-swapped, high pH, open, CaCl2, 4 °C in GDN: EMD-71444,
PDB 9PAR; Pm TRPM8 Chimeric Human(V905-L938) semi-swapped,
pH 7.4, open, CaCl2, 4 °C in GDN: EMD-74040, PDB 9ZCR; Human TRPM8
fully swapped, closed, unliganded, 4 °C in GDN: EMD-71391, PDB 9P8Y;
Human TRPM8 fully swapped, closed, desensitized, unliganded, cal-
cium-free 4 °C in cell vesicles: EMD-74042, PDB 9ZCV; Human TRPM8
fully swapped, open, unliganded, calcium-free 4 °C in cell vesicles:
EMD-74124, PDB 9ZF0; Human TRPM8 semi-swapped, unliganded,
calcium-free 4 °C in cell vesicles EMD-74129; Human TRPM8, fully
swapped, open, menthol, CaCl2-free, 4 °C in cell vesicles: EMD-71454,
PDB 9PB5; Human TRPM8 V915Y, fully swapped, closed, CaCl2, 4 °C in
GDN: EMD-74041, PDB 9ZCU; Human TRPM8 V915Y, semi-swapped,
CaCl2, 4 °C in GDN: EMD-74128; Raw cryo-EM data (micrographs and
particle stacks) for cold-adapted Pm TRPM8 without Ca2+ have been
deposited to EMPIAR database (13269). Mass spectrometry proteomics
data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium through
the PRIDE partner repository68 with the dataset identifier PXD064468.
52.	 Zheng, S. Q. et al. MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for
improved cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 14, 331–332 (2017).
53.	 Punjani, A., Rubinstein, J. L., Fleet, D. J. & Brubaker, M. A. cryoSPARC: algorithms for rapid
unsupervised cryo-EM structure determination. Nat. Methods 14, 290–296 (2017).
54.	 Bepler, T. et al. Positive-unlabeled convolutional neural networks for particle picking in
cryo-electron micrographs. Nat. Methods 16, 1153–1160 (2019).
55.	 Scheres, S. H. RELION: implementation of a Bayesian approach to cryo-EM structure
determination. J. Struct. Biol. 180, 519–530 (2012).
56.	 Jamali, K. et al. Automated model building and protein identification in cryo-EM maps.
Nature 628, 450–457 (2024).
57.
Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G. & Cowtan, K. Features and development of Coot.
Acta Crystallogr. D 66, 486–501 (2010).
58.	 Williams, C. J. et al. MolProbity: more and better reference data for improved all-atom
structure validation. Protein Sci. 27, 293–315 (2018).
59.	 Smart, O. S., Neduvelil, J. G., Wang, X., Wallace, B. A. & Sansom, M. S. HOLE: a program
for the analysis of the pore dimensions of ion channel structural models. J. Mol. Graph.
Model. 14, 354–360 (1996).
60.	 Olsson, M. H., Sondergaard, C. R., Rostkowski, M. & Jensen, J. H. PROPKA3: consistent
treatment of internal and surface residues in empirical pKa predictions. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 7, 525–537 (2011).
61.
Nguyen, D., Mayne, L., Phillips, M. C. & Walter Englander, S. Reference parameters for
protein hydrogen exchange rates. J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 29, 1936–1939 (2018).
62.	 Ferraro, D. M., Lazo, N. & Robertson, A. D. EX1 hydrogen exchange and protein folding.
Biochemistry 43, 587–594 (2004).
63.	 Tuttle, L. M. et al. Rigorous analysis of multimodal HDX-MS spectra. J. Am. Soc. Mass.
Spectrom. 36, 416–423 (2025).
64.	 Bellono, N. W. et al. Enterochromaffin cells are gut chemosensors that couple to sensory
neural pathways. Cell 170, 185–198 (2017).
65.	 Edelstein, A. D. et al. Advanced methods of microscope control using muManager software.
J. Biol. Methods 1, e10 (2014).
66.	 Rossen, N. D. et al. Population imaging of enterochromaffin cell activity reveals regulation
by somatostatin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 122, e2501525122 (2025).
67.
Wagih, O. ggseqlogo: a versatile R package for drawing sequence logos. Bioinformatics
33, 3645–3647 (2017).
68.	 Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database at 20 years: 2025 update. Nucleic Acids Res.
53, D543–D553 (2025).
Acknowledgements We thank S. Marqusee (University of California Berkeley) for providing
access to HDX–MS instruments and Byonic software during the early stage of this study,
D. Bulkley, G. Gilbert, L. Wang (UCSF EM Core), R. Yan and N. Spellmon (Janelia Cryo-EM Facility)
for their assistance with cryo-EM data acquisition and W. Choi for advice with data interpretation
and model building. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) (R35NS105038 to D.J. and R35GM140847 to Y.C.). Instruments at the UCSF Cryo-EM
facility are supported partially by grants from the NIH (S10OD020054, S10OD021741 and
S10OD026881) and Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Y.C. is an Investigator of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute.
Author contributions K.Y.C. carried out biochemical, structural and live-cell imaging
components of the study. X.L. carried out HDX–MS components of the project. All authors
participated in data analysis and evaluation and manuscript preparation. D.J. and Y.C. provided
advice and guidance throughout.
Competing interests Y.C. serves on the scientific advisory boards for ShuiMu BioSciences and
Pamplona Therapeutic Co. The other authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10276-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Yifan Cheng or
David Julius.
Peer review information Nature thanks Kasper Rand and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Data processing of TRPM8 structures determined in
detergent. a, Overview of data processing for a GDN-purified human TRPM8
structure determined at 4 °C. The consensus refinement is characterized by a
well resolved cytosolic domain and poorly resolved transmembrane region.
Subsequent classification led to 3D classes with similarly poorly resolved
transmembrane regions (bottom right: classes 1–7), and one class with a fully
resolved transmembrane domain (bottom right: class 8). Refinement of class 8
with C4 symmetry yielded a map at ~2.6 Å resolution. An overlay of the fitted
model and published hsTRPM8 model (PDB: 8BDC) is shown. This structure
resembles the published closed, fully-swapped pmTRPM8 structure (PDB:
6O6A; rmsd 1.781 Å), or the closed, fully-swapped hsTRPM8 structure (PDB:
8BDC; rmsd 0.744 Å). b, Overview of data processing for a GDN-purified P. major
TRPM8 structure determined in high pH at 4 °C. Consensus refinement with
either C1 or C4 symmetry revealed a lower gate configuration that involves F969
and contains a cation-like density. The displayed local resolution maps, GSFSC
plots, and orientation plots were generated using ChimeraX and cryoSPARC.
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Semi- and fully swapped architectures observed in
both avian and human TRPM8. a, Overview of data processing pipeline for
TRPM8 structures determined in cell vesicles. b, Bottom view of the fully- and
semi-swapped channel seen in avian or human TRPM8 reconstructions.
“Avian-ized” human channel (V915Y) in GDN shows increased resolution of the
semi-swapped configuration, suggesting that the V915Y mutation stabilizes
the semi-swapped configuration of the human channel. The semi-swapped
configuration is observed unambiguously in the hsTRPM8 wild type vesicle
dataset at 4 °C. c, Local resolution maps and GSFSC curves of TRPM8 structures
determined in this study. Local resolution maps and GSFSC plots were calculated
in cryoSPARC.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Menthol binding site. a, Representative structures
determined in the presence or absence of menthol for the avian or human
TRPM8, and close-up view of the VSLD at two map thresholds. Standard
deviation levels were set using ChimeraX, and exact map thresholds are
displayed. b, Overview and overlay of the menthol-bound VSLD of avian
(dark-blue) or human (light-blue) TRPM8. RMSD was 0.675 Å for 110 pruned
atom pairs, or 2.110 Å for all 132 pairs. c, Relative repositioning of the TRP helix
observed between the the menthol bound (blue) and unliganded, closed
structures (ghosted). In the presence of menthol, the TRP helix repositions
by a ~15° upwards tilt towards the VSLD.
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Menthol binding stabilizes the TRP helix. a,b, Heatmaps
showing changes in deuteration levels at each labelling time for all TMD peptides
of avian (a) or human (b) TRPM8 with or without menthol measured in one of
the following two conditions: (top) 1 mM menthol was added to whole cells prior
to protein extraction and maintained throughout purification and exchange;
(bottom) 1 mM menthol was added to purified TRPM8 protein only during
exchange. c, Changes in folding free energy (∆∆G) for TRPM8 upon menthol
binding at 22 °C mapped onto the transmembrane domain.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Comparison of the energetic profiles of human and
avian TRPM8 at different temperatures. a, Residue-level folding free energy
(∆G) calculated from HDX rates. Residue numbers correspond to the avian
sequence. b, Van’t Hoff analysis at peptide level. Individual curves correspond
to peptides from their respective structural domains. The lnKeq values are
shown relative to 37 °C to aid visual comparison between the two orthologues.
c, Standard folding enthalpy (ΔH°) for human and avian TRPM8 at the indicated
temperature ranges mapped onto monomer structure.
Extended Data Fig. 6 | pKa calculations of ionizable residues for the P. major
semi-swapped closed or fully-swapped desensitized channel observed in
cell vesicles. a, Overview of the P. major semi-swapped TRPM8 structure
(PDB: 9P91), and structural models of ionizable residues located near D907
for the (b) semi-swapped closed (PDB: 9P91) or (c) fully-swapped desensitized
(PDB: 9P90) structures. These models show that D907 is in proximity to ionizable
residues that comprise the extracellular interprotomer interface formed in
the semi-swapped structure (see Fig. 1e), whereas D907 in the fully-swapped,
desensitized model is not. d, pKa calculations for the respective PDB models for
ionizable residues found on the extracellular side of the channel determined
using PROPKA3 at pH 7.4.
Article
4 °C
22 °C
30 °C
37 °C
b
d
10
20
30
40
0
2
4
6
Position along axis (Å)
Radius (Å)
F969
c
F969
M968
a
pmTRPM8 Y905V
pmTRPM8 Outer Pore
Loop Chimera
pH 7.40 Cold
pH 9 Cold
0.1 mM Menthol
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Norm. Response / Max
ns
pH 7.40 Cold
pH 9 Cold
0.1 mM Menthol
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Norm. Response / Max
****
****
****
****
****
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Temperature response of “humanized” avian TRPM8
by calcium imaging, HDX-MS, and cryo-EM. a, Representative calcium
imaging responses obtained from HEK293T cells expressing pmTRPM8 Y905V
and a pmTRPM8 chimera replacing the entire outer pore loop sequence with
the respective hsTRPM8 sequence. Responses to cold or menthol (100 µM)
were normalized to maximum calcium signal following application of 10 µM
ionomycin. Each dot represents a single cell; n = 336 for pm Y905V; 259 for pm
outer pore loop chimera. Multi-measure one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc
analysis; ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001. b, Kinetics of deuterium uptake and
thermodynamic parameters for peptide 891–901 in pore helix for “humanized”
pmTRPM8 chimera at different temperatures. The solid lines represent
a stretched-exponential fit of the uptake data. c, Lower gate density and
model of pmTRPM8 human outer loop chimera structure resolved in cold at
physiologic pH reveals a similar gating arrangement as the wild-type pmTRPM8
channel structure in cold at high pH, and d, a similar pore profile calculated
using HOLE.
b
pmTRPM8 cold high pH (+CaCl2) EMD-71444
pmTRPM8 menthol (+EGTA) EMD-74123
hsTRPM8 cold (+EGTA) EMD-74124
hsTRPM8 menthol (+EGTA) EMD-71454
90º
S1
S5
S6
S5
S5
S6
S5
S5
S5
S6
S6
S6
Avian cold (GDN, high pH) EMD-71444
Human cold (vesicles, pH 7.4) EMD-74124
S6
S1
S5
S5
Threshold 0.20
Threshold 0.15
Threshold 0.25
Threshold 0.35
Threshold 0.35
Threshold 0.2
S5
S6
S5
S5
S5
S6
S6
S6
a
90º
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Lipid and ion densities in the cold-activated avian or
human TRPM8 structures. a, Details of lipid density observed at the TRPM8
PIP2 binding site for the avian channel determined in cold at high pH or the
human channel determined in cold in membranes at pH 7.4. Lipid densities are
coloured as orange, and modelled protein densities are coloured as light blue.
b, Cross-sectional top or side views of the central transmembrane cavity near
the lower gate in the presence or absence of calcium.
Article
Menthol;
Cold
Semi-swap
Open
Mammalian TRPM8
Fully-swap
Closed
Semi-swap
Closed
Fully-swap
Open
Fully-swap
Closed
Pathways captured in structure
Pathways not captured in structure
S6
F969 (Down)
PIP2
Ca2+
F969 (Up)
a
b
Avian TRPM8
Menthol;
Cold (high pH)
Fully-swap
Closed
Semi-swap
Closed
Semi-swap
Open
Fully-swap
Open
Fully-swap
Closed
Menthol; Cold
(physiologic pH)
Menthol;
Cold
α
α
α
π
π
α
α
α
α
α
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Model of TRPM8 activation by cold and menthol.
Free energy of channel activation. a, In mammalian TRPM8, the closed channel
exists in an equilibrium between fully- (S6 adopts a p helix) and semi-swapped
(S6 adopts an a helix) configurations, with the latter occupying a broader
energy well compared to the former. In each case, an a-helical S6 presents
a phenylalanine residue at the lower gate, which is stabilized in an upward
position to open the pore upon PIP2 binding. The open channel in the semi-
swapped configuration exhibits substantial heterogeneity and resides within a
particularly broad energy well. As a result, the conformational heterogeneity at
the pore region limits its visualization by cryo-EM and only the open structure
in the full-swapped configuration is captured. b, Avian TRPM8 similarly samples
both fully- and semi-swapped configurations in the absence of stimuli, but the
latter exhibits reduced heterogeneity compared to the mammalian channel,
facilitating its structural determination. Menthol or cold at high pH biases the
equilibration to semi-swapped configuration, promoting channel opening via a
mechanism analogous to the mammalian channel. However, in avian TRPM8 the
energy well corresponding to the open semi-swapped conformation is narrower
than that of mammalian TPRM8, resulting in a more structurally well-defined
state that is resolved by cryo-EM.
Extended Data Table 1 | Cryo-EM data collection, refinement, and validation statistics