# s41586-026-10288-y

Article
The DNA virome varies with human genes
and environments
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10288-y Nolan Kamitaki1,2,3,4,5,6 ✉, David Tang1,2,3,4, Steven A. McCarroll3,5,6,7 ✉ & Po-Ru Loh1,2,3 ✉
Received: 27 August 2025
Accepted: 17 February 2026 Many viruses have adapted to persist in infected humans for life1,2. Variable host control
of their ongoing abundance (viral load) can lead to clearance or disease3–5. Here we
Published online: xx xx xxxx
analysed the viral DNA load of 31 common viruses in human blood and saliva using
Open access
whole-genome sequencing data from UK Biobank (n = 490,401), All of Us (n = 414,817)
Check for updates
and Simons Foundation Powering Autism Research for Knowledge (SPARK; n = 12,519).
Viral DNA load varied markedly with age, time of day and season; most viruses were
also present at greater abundance in men than in women. Human genetic variation
at dozens of loci associated with DNA load of seven viruses: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV,
45 loci), human herpesvirus (HHV)-7 (37 loci), HHV-6B, Merkel cell polyomavirus and
three anelloviruses. Variation at the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) locus
generated the strongest associations (P = 5.8 × 10–9 to 2.5 × 10–1459), which were specific
to each virus. The HLA-B*08:01 allele also exhibited a host–virus genetic interaction
with EBV subtype (P = 7.4 × 10–70). Other human genetic effects implicated genes
encoding proteins that process peptides for antigen presentation, such as ERAP1
(HHV-7, P = 2.7 × 10–78) and ERAP2 (EBV, P = 4.6 × 10–111). Mendelian randomization
analyses supported a strong causal effect of EBV DNA load on increased risk of
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (P = 1.8 × 10–3), but not multiple sclerosis (P = 0.52). This suggests
that higher chronic EBV load increases lymphoma risk, whereas associations of EBV
infection with autoimmune conditions reflect host immune responses to particular
viral epitopes.
After infection by a virus, the long-term balance between viral replica- characterized, and the factors that drive such variation—and its poten-
tion and antiviral immune recognition within a person can result in tial effects on human health—are largely unknown. Human genetic
spontaneous clearance3, stable persistence around a set point of viral variants in the MHC region on chromosome 6 and a few other genomic
load, as with lifelong EBV infection4, or progression to disease, such as loci have been shown to influence load of HIV16,17 and hepatitis C18, and
the progression from human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection to chronic persistence (versus spontaneous clearance) of hepatitis B19
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)5. EBV infection is a large and C20. Less is known about variation in load of those viruses that
risk factor for Hodgkin’s lymphoma6 and multiple sclerosis7 years after commonly reside latently in healthy individuals, although immune
primary infection, and is associated with other autoimmune disorders (antibody) response to EBV and other common viruses is known to be
for reasons that are not well understood8. influenced by host genetics21,22. The drivers of viral load variation in
Large-scale DNA sequencing studies of blood samples from thou- tissues other than blood also remain largely unexplored.
sands of individuals have begun to characterize the blood DNA virome—
the population of DNA viruses and retroviruses that is resident within
The DNA virome in blood and saliva
each person’s blood system—which spans a broad spectrum of viral
species9,10. Two commonly observed taxa are herpesviruses, which are Many DNA viruses transit between latent infection and lytic activation
latently present in most humans, and anelloviruses, which are thought in blood and saliva. Blood and saliva are also the two primary sources
to be commensal or even symbiotic11. The amount of a virus present of genomic DNA in human population genetic studies. To quantify viral
within an individual—viral load—varies over time and is a potential DNA load from widely available whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data,
biomarker of immune function12–14. Increased viral load may indicate we analysed sequencing reads that were previously generated from
reduced immunocompetence and can lead to disease (such as AIDS or high-coverage WGS (mean 32.5× to 42×) of 490,401 blood samples in UK
liver cancer from viral hepatitis15), either as a direct result of inadequate Biobank23 (UKB), 365,918 blood samples and 48,899 saliva samples in
control of an existing virus or through susceptibility to new infection. the All of Us (AoU) dataset24 and 12,519 saliva samples in SPARK25 (Fig. 1a).
The extent to which viral load in blood—and in other tissues such We aligned sequencing reads of potential non-human origin to a refer-
as saliva—varies among individuals and across the lifespan is less well ence panel that we assembled of 31 common viruses (27 DNA viruses
1Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 2Center for Data Sciences, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. 3Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 4Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. 5Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 6Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
7Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. ✉e-mail: nolan_kamitaki@hms.harvard.edu; smccarro@broadinstitute.org; poruloh@broadinstitute.org
Nature | www.nature.com | 1
Article
Individuals
Call variants and genotype
Align WGS reads to
human reference (hg38)
Individuals
Map to viral Quantify
genomes presence and
abundance
and 4 retroviruses; Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1), infectious particles (virions) present in bodily fluids. In blood, viral DNA
selected on the basis of earlier WGS-based blood virome studies9,10. is known to be more frequently host-cell-derived for EBV26 and torque
In the following analyses, we use the term ‘prevalence’ to refer to the teno viruses (TTVs; a common form of anelloviruses)14.
proportion of research participants with at least one WGS read pair As in other cohorts9,10, viral DNA was infrequently detected in blood
that aligns to a given viral genome and ‘abundance’ to mean the num- WGS data from UKB and AoU, with most individuals having no sequenc-
ber of such read pairs from a given biological sample. The viral DNA ing reads that could be confidently attributable to any virus (Fig. 1b,c,
fragments counted in these measurements of viral DNA load could be Extended Data Fig. 1b and Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). This was
derived from viral genomes present within host cells or from cell-free expected despite the near-ubiquity of herpesviruses and anelloviruses
2 | Nature | www.nature.com
stnairaV
sesuriV
490,401 individuals (UK Biobank) Human genotype matrix
365,918 individuals (All of Us)
AA GA GG AA GG GA
Mapped CA CC CC CC CA AA
Mixed DNA CT CT CT CC CT TT
Human reads GG GG GG GA AA GA
Blood
Viral DNA load matrix
Saliva
Unmapped
12,519 individuals (SPARK) Viral reads
48,899 individuals (All of Us)
etaicossA
a
b c
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
0 1 2 [3,10) [10,3
[
0
3
) 0,1
[
0
1
0
0
) 0,30
[
0
3
) 00,1k) [1k,3
[
k
3
) k,10
[1
k
0
) k,30k) ≥30k
Number of read pairs
d e
slaudividni
fo
noitroporP
Blood Blood
Virus
EBV eHHV-6B
eHHV-6A HHV-6B
HHV-7 1,000
100
10
TTV (TUS01)
B19V
TTV (HD14a)
1 HHV-6A HHV-6B EBV
CMV HHV-7
TTV (VT416)
0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
Virus
EBV
HHV-6B
HHV-7
)sriap
daer
fo
.on(
ecnadnuba
naeM
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
0 1 2 [3,10
[
) 10,30
[3
) 0,1
[
0
1
0
0
) 0,300
[3
) 00,1k) [1k,3k
[3
) k,1
[
0
1
k
0
) k,30k) ≥30k
Number of read pairs
slaudividni
fo
noitroporP
eHHV-6A
eHHV-6B
1,000
HHV-7
100
EBV
HAdV-B HSV-1 HHV-6B
10 KIPyV CMV
HPV16 WUPyV
HPyV6 MCPyV
TTV (HD14a)
1 HPyV7 HAdV-E TTV (TUS01)
HPV18 TTV (VT416)
0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0
Prevalence of viral reads (%)
)sriap
daer
fo
.on(
ecnadnuba
naeM
Saliva Saliva
Fig. 1 | Detection and quantification of viral DNA load in blood and saliva geometric mean of the number of observed read pairs among samples in which
WGS. a, Detection (presence or absence) and quantification (abundance) of the virus was detected. For HHV-6, data from carriers of chromosomally
viral DNA sequences in WGS data derived from human blood and saliva samples, integrated endogenous HHV-6A and HHV-6B are indicated separately in grey.
including blood samples from the UKB (n = 490,401) and AoU (n = 365,918) Viruses that appear in subsequent figures are indicated with colours. CMV,
cohorts and saliva samples from the SPARK (n = 12,519) and AoU (n = 48,899) cytomegalovirus. d, Distribution of viral DNA fragment counts (read pairs)
cohorts. Sequence reads that did not map to the human genome were aligned from EBV, HHV-7 and HHV-6B genomes in saliva-derived WGS data from SPARK
against a reference panel of 31 viral genomes to identify and tabulate viral DNA participants (n = 12,519). e, Prevalence and abundance of viral DNA sequences
fragments. b, Distribution of viral DNA fragment counts (read pairs) from EBV, in SPARK saliva WGS data. HAdV-B, human adenovirus species B; HAdV-E,
HHV-7 and HHV-6B genomes in blood-derived WGS data from UKB participants human adenovirus species E; HPV16, human papillomavirus 16; HPyV6, human
(n = 490,401). c, Prevalence (population frequency) and mean abundance of polyomavirus 6; HSV, herpes simplex virus; KIPyV, KI polyomavirus; WUPyV,
viral DNA sequences in UKB blood WGS data. Mean abundance indicates the WU polyomavirus.
in humans across populations11 (for example, 94.7% EBV seroprevalence (P = 1.7 × 10−28), suggesting that viral load of HHV-7 and HHV-6B decline
in UKB), given the low fractions of latently infected cells that carry viral with age (Fig. 2b). In saliva samples from SPARK, which represented
DNA4 (Methods): viral reads are stochastically observed at rates propor- infancy to old age, viral DNA loads within age tranches (measured by
tional to the number of copies of a viral genome present in a person’s viral read prevalence or mean abundance) exhibited trajectories that
blood. Despite this sparsity, several properties of the dataset, such as varied markedly with age and across viruses (Fig. 2a and Extended Data
enrichment of viral reads in seropositive individuals and consistent Figs. 1d and 3a–d). Most viruses appear to increase rapidly in preva-
depth-of-coverage within viral genomes, supported genuine viral ori- lence in the first several years of life (Fig. 2a), presumably reflecting pri-
gin of these reads (Extended Data Figs. 1c,d and 2 and Supplementary mary infection, after which EBV DNA prevalence continued to increase
Note 1). Additionally, a large majority of the sequencing reads ascer- with age (P = 7.6 × 10−140), whereas HHV-6B DNA prevalence decreased
tained to be of viral origin had been aligned to a viral reference genome sharply and steadily from childhood onwards (P = 6.4 × 10−315; Fig. 2a),
with high mapping quality (Supplementary Note 2). Different viruses perhaps indicating increasing control by the adaptive immune system
tended not to be co-observed much more frequently than by chance, of the host over life. HHV-7 viral read prevalence in saliva increased
with the exception of anelloviruses (Extended Data Fig. 1e). A small frac- steadily to more than 95% before modestly decreasing in middle age
tion of blood samples (675 out of 490,401 in UKB) exhibited unusually (P = 6.1 × 10−585; Fig. 2a), consistent with the pattern in UKB blood
large numbers of parvovirus B19-derived reads9,10; these donors had samples (Fig. 2b), whereas HHV-7 viral abundance in saliva began to
greatly depleted reticulocyte counts (P = 1.4 × 10−67; Extended Data decrease in childhood (P = 6.6 × 10−194; Extended Data Fig. 3c), suggest-
Fig. 1f), consistent with active viral infection of red blood cell precursors ing diminishing intensity or frequency of lytic events.
by B19V27. High, approximately 15× coverage of the HHV-6A or HHV-6B Notably, viral DNA load was consistently higher in men than in
genome by WGS reads was also observed in around 1% of donors (Fig. 1c women, across seven viruses and in both blood and saliva (Fig. 2a–d).
and Extended Data Fig. 1b,g), indicating inheritance of haplotypes con- This aligns with observations of stronger immune responses and lower
taining copies of these viral genomes that have integrated into human viral load of HIV and hepatitis B in women relative to men32. These sex
chromosomes (endogenous HHV-6 (eHHV-6))28. These carriers (0.32% differences in viral DNA load appeared to emerge in adolescence
of donors with eHHV-6A and 1.03% with eHHV-6B, comparable to previ- (Fig. 2a). Viral DNA prevalence also displayed substantial circadian
ous work28,29) were excluded from analyses of HHV-6 viral DNA load. and seasonal variation (Fig. 2e,f and Extended Data Fig. 3e–l) that was
In contrast to blood, saliva WGS data contained viral DNA sequences robust to potential confounders (Supplementary Note 3), although
that were highly prevalent and abundant in SPARK (Fig. 1d,e and Sup- confounding by unmeasured visit-related factors cannot be fully
plementary Table 4) and AoU (Extended Data Fig. 1h and Supplemen- excluded. Viral read prevalence increased by about 1.2–1.3-fold from
tary Table 5) data. Several herpesviruses exhibited prominent bimodal 09:00 to 20:00 (based on recorded times of blood sample acquisi-
distributions of observed viral read counts, with saliva WGS samples tion) for both EBV and HHV-7, but with somewhat different trajectories
tending to either contain no reads from the virus or to contain many over the course of the day (Kronos33 harmonic regression P = 1.2 × 10−9
such reads (tens, hundreds or thousands; Fig. 1d). This suggests that for and 3.3 × 10−23, respectively; Fig. 2e). EBV viral read prevalence was
these viruses that infect more than 90% of people, viral DNA in saliva also about 1.3-fold higher in winter compared with summer months,
originates not from constantly present latent infections, but rather whereas HHV-7 showed different, more modest seasonal variation
from frequent bursts of active (lytic) viral replication and release that (Kronos P = 2.9 × 10−101 and 9.8 × 10−12, respectively; Fig. 2f). These pat-
vary widely in intensity. For HHV-7, these lytic episodes appear to occur terns replicated in AoU saliva samples (for EBV; Extended Data Fig. 3k,l)
continuously, such that HHV-7 DNA was detectable in nearly all saliva and were not driven by cyclical variation in lymphocyte percentages
samples from adults (Extended Data Fig. 1h), whereas for EBV, viral shed- in UKB blood samples, which exhibited weaker and different patterns
ding in saliva appears to be common but intermittent, with roughly half (Extended Data Fig. 3m,n). The high prevalence of EBV reads in saliva
of saliva samples exhibiting no EBV DNA (Fig. 1d). In contrast to herpes- with similar circadian patterns as blood, together with the bimodal
viruses, DNA from anelloviruses was detected in saliva only modestly abundance of EBV DNA in saliva (Fig. 1d), suggests lytic events may
more frequently than in blood, typically at low abundances (one or a few be quite frequent and play a larger role in determining systemic load.
reads; Fig. 1c,e), consistent with anelloviruses having a distinct replica- Viral DNA load also exhibited prominent, several-fold variation across
tion cycle30. Several viruses that were rarely detected in blood (less than genetic ancestries, with different viruses enriched in different ancestry
0.1% prevalence) were detected in saliva at low to moderate prevalence groups (Extended Data Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 6 and Supplemen-
(Fig. 1c,e). Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV)—which commonly infects tary Note 4). These patterns were robust to controlling for available
skin cells and can cause Merkel cell carcinoma—was seen in 5.7% of saliva socioeconomic variables (Supplementary Note 4).
samples (Fig. 1e), supporting a previous study31. Endogenous HHV-6A
and HHV-6B were observed in SPARK at rates similar to UKB (0.37% and
Human genetics shapes viral DNA load
0.78%, respectively; Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 1i). Viral DNA load
levels were broadly independent of autism spectrum disorder status Almost all human traits are shaped by genetic variation in ways that
in SPARK (Extended Data Fig. 1j,k) and were consistent between SPARK can elucidate molecular mechanisms. To identify such human genetic
and AoU saliva samples (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 1h). effects on viral DNA load, we performed genome-wide association stud-
ies (GWAS) on viral DNA load phenotypes in UKB and AoU (Methods).
For viral DNA load in blood, we then meta-analysed results across UKB
Viral DNA load varies with age, sex and time
and AoU. Common variation (minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.1%) at
The measurement of the prevalence and abundance of diverse viruses 82 loci in the human genome associated (at P < 5 × 10−8) with viral DNA
in the blood and saliva of so many people made it possible to recog- load of one or more viruses in blood (of 6 tested): 45 loci for EBV, 3 loci for
nize correlations with age, sex and circadian and seasonal dynam- HHV-6B, 37 loci for HHV-7, 6 loci for TTV (TUS01), 6 loci for TTV (HD14a)
ics through cross-sectional analyses of the large cohort. Age and and 2 loci for TTV (VT416) (Fig. 3a–c, Extended Data Fig. 5 and Sup-
sex exhibited strong associations with viral DNA load (Fig. 2a–d). In plementary Table 7). Common variants also associated with viral DNA
blood samples from UKB, which recruited participants aged 40–70 load in saliva samples from AoU for EBV (2 loci), HHV-6B (3 loci), HHV-7
years, viral DNA prevalence of EBV and TTVs was greater in older (12 loci) and MCPyV (2 loci) (Extended Data Fig. 6). We verified that these
individuals (P = 6.7 × 10−356 and 1.4 × 10−451, respectively; regression), associations were not driven by misalignment of human reads to viral
as recently observed for TTVs14, whereas viral DNA prevalence was genomes (Extended Data Fig. 7a,b and Supplementary Note 5), were
greater in younger individuals for HHV-7 (P = 6.7 × 10−200) and HHV-6B concordant between UKB and AoU (Extended Data Fig. 7c–e), reflected
Nature | www.nature.com | 3
Article
e f
Hour of day
4 | Nature | www.nature.com
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo
ecnelaverP
18
EBV P = 1.6 × 10−8
16
14
12
HHV-7 P = 5.9 × 10–16 10
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Month of year
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo
ecnelaverP
a b
Age (years)
c d
16 EBV P = 6.3 x 10–80
14
12
HHV-7 P = 1.4 × 10–6
10
8
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo
ecnelaverP
Male Female 20
HHV-7
18
Male Female EBV
16
14
12
EBV 10
8
HHV-7
HHV-6B 6
4 TTVs
2
HHV-6B
0
40−44 45−49 50−54 55−59 60−64 65−69
Age (years)
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo
ecnelaverP
Saliva Blood
100
80
60
40
20
MCPyV
0
0−1 2−4 5−9 10−14 15−19 20−29 30−39 40−49 50−59 60+
EBV HHV-7 HHV-6B TTVs CMV MCPyV HSV-1
16.0 58 98 60.0 2.6 7.0 0.40
3.5
10
9.3 1.225 15.5 56 97 57.5 2.4
3.0
0.35 8 6.5 15.0 9.0 1.200
54 2.2 96 55.0 2.5 14.5 6 52 8.7 1.175 0.30 2.0 6.0 95 52.5 2.0 14.0 4 50 8.4 1.150
1.8
Blood Blood
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo ecnelaverP
EBV HHV-7 HHV-6B CMV MCPyV
4.8 200
150 3.50 5 4.4
180
125 3.25 4
4.0 160 100 3.00 3 3.6 140 75 2 2.75
Female Male Female Male
)sriap
daer
fo .on(
ecnadnuba naeM
Saliva
Blood Saliva Blood Saliva Blood Saliva Blood Blood Saliva Saliva Saliva
77–01 × 8.6 = P 14–01 × 2.1 = P 53–01 × 6.1 = P
7–01
× 5.6
= P
48.0
= P
11–01 ×
7.1 = P 553–01 × 6.6 = P
8–01
× 3.9 = P
5–01
× 7.4
= P 551–01 × 6.3 = P
21.0
= P 91–01 × 2.6 = P 56–01 × 1.2 = P
31–01
x 2.3 = P
73.0
= P
06–01 × 3.2 = P
Fig. 2 | Age, sex, time of day and time of year associations with viral DNA sequences by sex in saliva-derived WGS from AoU (EBV: n = 9,973 men and
load. a, Prevalence of viral DNA sequences by age and sex in saliva-derived WGS 15,856 women; CMV: n = 409 men and 622 women; MCPyV: n = 1,840 men and
from SPARK (n = 12,519 total, 58–1,582 participants per age–sex bin). Error bars 1,185 women) and SPARK (HHV-7: n = 3,288 fathers and 3,217 mothers; HHV-6B:
represent 95% confidence intervals. b, Prevalence of viral DNA sequences by n = 1,945 fathers and 1,762 mothers). Centres indicate mean and error bars
age and sex in blood-derived WGS from UKB. Anellovirus (TTV) measurements represent 95% confidence intervals. e, Prevalence of viral DNA sequences in
group together reads aligned to the TUS01, HD14a and VT416 reference genomes UKB blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to the nearest
(n = 482,882 total, 22,896–63,810 participants per age–sex bin). Error bars hour, n = 490,136 total, 6,618–52,949 participants per hour). Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. c, Prevalence of viral DNA sequences by represent 95% confidence intervals. f, Prevalence of viral DNA sequences
sex in blood-derived WGS from UKB (EBV, HHV-7, HHV-6B, TTV: n = 222,094 in UKB blood WGS data by month of sample collection (n = 490,136 total,
men and 263,132 women) and AoU (CMV: n = 143,918 men and 220,649 women) 27,364–51,195 participants per month). Error bars represent 95% confidence
and saliva-derived WGS from AoU (EBV, CMV, MCPyV, HSV-1: n = 17,335 men and intervals. P values from two-sided linear regression (c,d) or one-sided ANOVA
31,425 women) and SPARK (HHV-7, HHV-6B: n = 3,378 fathers and 3,380 mothers). test between models with and without collection hour (e) or month (f)
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. d, Abundance of viral DNA (see Methods).
a
Chromosome
b
c d
e f g
Nature | www.nature.com | 5
)P
daol
AND VBE(
gol
–
01
640
320
160 80 40
20
10
5
2.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 20 22 X
22NPTP 7FMALS 1A8CLS A11LCB 4ALTC SEMOE 2RCC 51PRAP 3TRTCA 6LCB QKGD TRET
2PARE/1PARE
5A22CLS/4A22CLS
4FRI
ALH
LVPC 1FZKI MATRC RBTL 3B2HS 2CABU B31FSFNT 3FART
h g
LAGTI
B31FSRFNT
8FRI
1RSK BMDSG 2LCB 07DC
VBE
3LCB
1ARLIL/1BRLIL
5TGG
7-VHH VTT )614TV( VTT )10SUT( VTT )a41DH(
0.01
0
2
0.05 MHC
Non-MHC
0.04
0.03
0.02
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
)P
daol
AND
VBE(
gol
–
01
HLA-DRB1
HLA-DQA1
HLA-DQB1
HLA-B HLA-DPA1
HLA-A HLA-C HLA-DPB1
1,200
HLA-coding variants
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
)P
daol
AND
7-VHH(
gol
–
01
HLA-DRB1
HLA-DQA1
HLA-DQB1
HLA-B HLA-DPA1
HLA-A HLA-C HLA-DPB1
HLA-coding variants 80
60
40
20
0
96.6 96.8 97.0 97.2
Chromosome 5 position (Mb)
)P(
gol– 01
Chromosome
CAST ERAP2
ERAP1 LNPEP LIX1RIOK2
ERAP1Q730E
ERAP1K528R
ERAP2 NMD
EBV HHV-7
)P daol
AND 7-VHH(
gol
–
01
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 18 20 22 X
2DC 2FCN B1DNNED 1A8CLS 6MCM
011PS
SEMOE 7PNES A21LI
2PARE/1PARE
51CSAC
ALH
2HCAB 1KXOF 1FZAJ
A01FSRFNT
4MCM OBA L1TEB 4DC11PRAP
4CRLK−1CRLK
BLEH B73SPV 3TLF 31MIRT LMP 5CRLN NIAPR
5NFLS
1ECRAMS 1L51SPE A21BVM 2XM
640
320 160 80 40
20
10
5
2.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 131415 161718 2022 X
Chromosome
)10SUT(
VTT(
gol
–
01
)P
daol
AND
160
80
40
20
10
5
2.5
6XDRP
1PXOF
ALH
3PIAFNT
SAF
1PBKBT
DRB1*04:04 rs9265884
Other MHC region variants Other MHC region variants
Fig. 3 | Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load in blood. DNA load phenotypes from variants within versus outside of the MHC region
a, Genome-wide associations of human genetic variants with EBV DNA load in of the human genome, defined as 24–35 Mb on chromosome 6 (n = 419,421
blood (inverse-normal transformed abundance), meta-analysed across UKB unrelated UKB participants with European ancestry). Error bars represent
(n = 453,770) and AoU (n = 201,168) European-ancestry sub-cohorts. b, Genome- 95% confidence intervals. e, Associations of variants in the MHC region of the
wide associations with HHV-7 DNA load in blood (inverse-normal transformed human genome with EBV DNA load in blood in UKB participants with European
abundance), meta-analysed across UKB (n = 453,770) and AoU (n = 200,091) ancestry. f, Analogous to e, for HHV-7 DNA load. g, Associations of common
European-ancestry sub-cohorts. c, Genome-wide associations with anellovirus genetic variants at the ERAP1–ERAP2–LNPEP locus with EBV DNA load (green)
TUS01 DNA load in blood (inverse-normal transformed abundance), meta- and HHV-7 DNA load (blue) in blood. Arrows indicate direction of transcription
analysed across UKB (n = 453,770) and AoU (n = 200,091) European-ancestry for nearby genes. Associations of two missense variants in ERAP1 and a cryptic
sub-cohorts. d, Estimates of heritability from common genetic variants for viral splice variant in ERAP2 are indicated with diamonds.
Article
distinct effects in blood versus saliva (Extended Data Fig. 7f–i), and HHV-6B DNA load) encode nuclear proteins with roles in restricting
did not overlap any of the ten telomeric sites of eHHV-6 chromosomal herpesvirus replication39,40. Associations at genes that influence apop-
integration that we identified in UKB data (Extended Data Fig. 7j,k and tosis (FAS, TNFAIP3 and TBKBP1) suggest that virally induced apoptosis
Supplementary Note 6). signalling might be particularly important for anellovirus survival41. At
For six of the above seven viruses (all except HHV-6B), the MHC the ABO locus, which determines the presence of blood group antigens
region harboured the strongest associations between common human bound by some viruses42, alleles that produce type A and type B antigens
genetic variants and viral DNA load (Fig. 3a–c, Extended Data Figs. 5 both associated with higher HHV-7 DNA load (Extended Data Fig. 9k,l).
and 6 and Supplementary Table 7). The MHC region as a whole contrib- Associations at the LILR (leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor) and
uted large proportions of viral DNA load heritability (56% for EBV, 32% CPVL (carboxypeptidase vitellogenic like) genes, like the strong asso-
for HHV-7 and 14–30% for the anelloviruses in UKB; Fig. 3d), as previ- ciations at HLA and ERAP1/ERAP2, indicated the importance of genetic
ously observed for HIV17. Association patterns in the MHC region—the variation that modulates viral peptide presentation and recognition43,44.
specific associating single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their Gene-level burden tests of rare loss-of-function and missense variants
relative strengths of association—were unique to each virus (Fig. 3e,f in UKB additionally identified four genes in which rare protein-coding
and Supplementary Table 8). For EBV viral DNA load in blood, the top variants associated with increased viral DNA load: TERT and ASAH2B
genetic association was generated by the human leukocyte antigen for EBV, and MX2 and ZNF584 for HHV-7 (P < 2.8 × 10−6; Supplementary
(HLA) DRB1*04:04 allele (Fig. 3e), which associated with almost twofold Table 9). These associations appeared to be virus-specific, except for
increased prevalence of EBV reads (23.0% (s.e.m. 0.2%) in heterozy- ZNF584, for which rare coding variants also associated with increased
gous carriers versus 13.6% (s.e.m. 0.05%) in non-carriers). DRB1 is a EBV DNA load (P = 3.1 × 10−3). At two loci (CPVL and TNFRSF13B) at which
co-receptor that EBV binds to enter human cells34; DRB1*04:04 might a missense variant generated the top common-variant association with
encode an isoform with higher affinity for EBV protein gp42, facilitat- EBV DNA load, the burden test demonstrated concordant associations
ing infection. Several other independent associations with EBV DNA of loss-of-function variants in these genes (Extended Data Fig. 9m,n).
load were centred in or near other HLA genes (Fig. 3e). This pattern The strong ancestry differences in viral DNA load (Extended Data
was also observed (but less pronounced) for HHV-7 (Fig. 3f). Some Fig. 4 and Supplementary Note 4) led us to query whether GWAS of
of these associations are likely to reflect the role of the HLA system in EBV and HHV-7 DNA load in AoU participants with African ancestry
viral antigen presentation and immune response; specific HLA alleles (n = 77,573) might identify specific loci contributing to these dif-
that strongly enable presentation of peptides from a given virus may ferences. These analyses identified a novel association at ACKR1:
drive distinct effects of HLA alleles on load of different viruses. Genetic the rs2814778-CC genotype that generates the malaria-protective
variation in the MHC region has also been observed to associate with Duffy-null phenotype45 appeared to explain 28% [21%–35%] and 45%
measurements of several anti-EBV antibodies22, but only a subset of [38%–52%] of the African-versus-European ancestry differences in
these serological measurements (VCA-p18 and ZEBRA) exhibited asso- EBV and HHV-7 DNA prevalence, respectively, and these associations
ciation patterns similar to that of EBV DNA load (Extended Data Fig. 8 are only partially explained by neutropaenia in Duffy-null individuals46
and Supplementary Note 7), suggesting that levels of some but not all (Extended Data Fig. 10 and Supplementary Note 9).
antibodies are influenced by viral DNA load.
The strong associations of HLA alleles with viral DNA load enabled
HLA-B*08:01 association is EBV type-specific
us to characterize how these genetic effects vary across individuals as
a function of age and other genotypes (Extended Data Fig. 9a–h and EBV is known to exist in two main strains, type 1 and type 2, which differ
Supplementary Note 8). Some associations of variants in the MHC primarily in the sequences of key latency-associated EBV genes47 and
region with EBV DNA load also exhibited specificity to blood or saliva; may interact differently with the host immune system. This raises the
in particular, the HLA-A*02:01 allele appeared to decrease EBV DNA possibility that some human genetic variants involved in host–virus
load in blood (P = 2.9 × 10−431) but have no effect on EBV DNA load in genetic interactions—for example, HLA alleles with affinities for spe-
saliva (P = 0.099; Extended Data Fig. 9i), consistently across cohorts cific viral peptides—might associate specifically with viral DNA load of
(Extended Data Fig. 9j). One possible explanation is that A*02:01 could one EBV type but not the other, as has been observed for hepatitis C48.
present a peptide from a latent-phase EBV antigen, which could help To search for such effects, we separately quantified type 1 and type
control infection in blood but have little effect on recognition of the 2 EBV by realigning WGS reads to EBV type 1 and type 2 reference geno-
lytically infected plasma or epithelial cells that more directly influence mes and identifying reads that aligned within two type-informative
viral DNA load in saliva. genomic regions (EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C)49 (Fig. 4a, Extended Data
Haplotypes at the ERAP1–ERAP2–LNPEP locus (on chromosome 5), Fig. 11a,b and Methods). The prevalence of reads from EBV type 2 relative
which encodes the ERAP1, ERAP2 and LNPEP peptidases that process to type 1 varied significantly by an individual’s place of birth (Fig. 4b,c
peptides for MHC display35, associated strongly with DNA load of EBV and Extended Data Fig. 11c), as expected50. EBV type 2 was relatively
(P = 1.8 × 10−77 in UKB) and HHV-7 (P = 2.7 × 10−78; Fig. 3g). For HHV-7, more prevalent in individuals born in Africa50 compared with individuals
the association signal appeared to be driven by two missense variants born in Europe (P = 5.4 × 10−7) or North America (P = 0.042; Fig. 4b), and
in ERAP1 (in high linkage disequilibrium with each other, r2 = 0.7) that its relative prevalence also varied regionally among individuals born
affect substrate preference (Q730E) and enzymatic activity (K528R)36. in the UK (Fig. 4c), independently of overall EBV prevalence (Extended
By contrast, EBV DNA load associated more strongly with variation Data Fig. 11d). Notably, quantitative antibody responses to EBV antigens
near ERAP2 and LNPEP, including a common cryptic splice variant were slightly higher in individuals with type 2 EBV than in those with type
(rs2248374) that generates a truncated ERAP2 transcript that under- 1 EBV (Extended Data Fig. 11e–h), suggesting that type 2 EBV might gener-
goes nonsense-mediated decay37. ate a stronger autoimmune response for autoantigen epitope mimics.
Beyond the very large effects from the HLA and ERAP1–ERAP2–LNPEP Genetic association analyses leveraging this additional information
loci, each virus associated with additional human genomic loci (Fig. 3a–c, about EBV type suggested that HLA variation confers type-specific pro-
Extended Data Figs. 5 and 6 and Supplementary Table 7). These loci tection against EBV infection (Fig. 4d–g). In analyses of EBV type 1 and
contained many genes with known or likely roles in viral infection, type 2 DNA load separately, association patterns in the MHC region
immune evasion and proliferation. Some of these loci, such as the (Fig. 4d,e) were broadly similar to those that we had observed for total
B cell lymphoma (BCL) genes (associated with EBV DNA load), are likely EBV DNA load (Fig. 3e), presumably reflecting the contributions of
to encode alleles that affect survival and proliferation of infected host many human genetic effects that were difficult to resolve. However, a
cells38. By contrast, PML, SP110 and MX2 (associated with HHV-7 and/or case-case association analysis—in which genetic data from individuals
6 | Nature | www.nature.com
a d
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0
0 50000 100000 150000
EBV genomic position
b c e
f
g
Nature | www.nature.com | 7
htiw
slaudividni
fo
noitroporP
nib
pb-005
ot
gnippam
sdaer
EBNA2 EBNA3A–EBNA3C
EBV type 1 DNA presence vs absence
Type 1
Type 2
EBV type 2 DNA presence vs absence
Oceania
India
Pakistan Sri Lanka
Asia
Germany
UK
Ireland
Europe
USA
Caribbean
North America
Kenya
Nigeria
Ghana
EBV type 1 DNA presence vs EBV type 2 presence
Africa
South America
10 20 30 40
Percentage of individuals with
EBV type 2-specific reads
EBV type 1 DNA presence vs EBV type 2 DNA presence | B*08:01
htrib
fo
ecalP
150
100
50
0
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
Percentage of individuals
with EBV type 2-
specific reads
B*08:01
14 1.00
60° N 12 30 0 0 . . 5 7 0 5
10 0.25
20 58° N
10
56° N
0
54° N
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
52° N
50° N
1.00 B*08:01
6°
W
4°
W
2°
W 0° 60
0
0
.
.
5
7
0
5
0.25
40
20
0
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
60
40
20
0
24 26 28 30 32 34
Chromosome 6 position (Mb)
)P(
gol–
01
R2
1.00 0 0 . . 5 7 0 5 B*08:01
0.25
)P(
gol–
)P(
gol–
)P(
gol–
01
01
01
R2
R2
Fig. 4 | Analyses of EBV type 1 and type 2 identify a type-specific association c, Proportion of UKB participants positive for EBV type 2 by region of birth
with HLA-B*08:01. a, Frequencies of observing WGS reads mapping to each within the UK (n = 9,769). Map source: Office for National Statistics, licensed
500 bp segment of the EBV type 1 (black line) and type 2 (green line) reference under the Open Government Licence v.3.0 and Contains OS data. Crown
genomes in saliva WGS samples from SPARK (n = 12,519). Highlighted in grey copyright and database rights 2017–2026. d, Associations of variants in the
are two regions used to distinguish EBV types, both containing genes with MHC region of the human genome with EBV type 1 positivity (presence of
known type-specific sequences, EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C. Read alignments two or more WGS reads that mapped to type-informative regions of the EBV
in these two regions show consistent ratios of type 1-aligned to type 2-aligned type 1 genome) in UKB blood WGS (n = 418,403 unrelated participants with
reads, whereas other EBV genomic regions (that are not type-informative) do European ancestry). Variants are coloured by linkage disequilibrium relative
not. b, Proportion of UKB participants positive for EBV type 2 (among EBV to HLA-B*08:01 (green-to-purple shading), indicated by the large green dot.
DNA-positive individuals) by location of birth. In each group, the proportion e, Associations of variants with EBV type 2 positivity. f, Associations of variants
was estimated as the number of UKB blood WGS samples containing two or with EBV type 2 positivity, using individuals with EBV type 1 positivity as controls
more EBV type 2-specific reads divided by the number containing two or more (n = 9,233 unrelated participants with European ancestry). g, Conditional
type 1-specific or two or more type 2-specific reads (total n = 11,511 participants). associations of variants with EBV type 2 positivity, using individuals with
Estimates are shown for countries of birth with more than 35 samples containing EBV type 1 positivity as controls, after including HLA-B*08:01 genotype as a
a type-specific read, and for continental groupings (aggregated across covariate. P values by two-sided linear regression (d–g).
all countries; diamonds). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Article
with higher type 2 DNA load were compared against genetic data from To use this approach to assess the potential effect of EBV DNA load
those with higher type 1 DNA load—generated a readily interpretable on autoimmune diseases and blood cancers that are epidemiologically
association pattern led by the MHC class I B*08:01 allele (P = 7.4 × 10−70; associated with EBV infection2, we analysed GWAS summary statistics
Fig. 4f). B*08:01 appeared to be protective against type 1 EBV (odds from a meta-analysis of FinnGen54, UKB55 and the Million Veteran Pro-
ratio (OR) = 0.62 [0.59–0.66] for observing a type 1 read; P = 7.1 × 10−72) gram56 using four Mendelian randomization methods, excluding the
but associated with increased risk for type 2 EBV (OR = 1.63 [1.48–1.80]; MHC region to guard against pleiotropy from linkage disequilibrium53
P = 4.1 × 10−24), suggesting that it may have high affinity for one or more (Supplementary Table 15). For multiple sclerosis, for which prior EBV
peptides derived from the type 1 EBNA-2 or EBNA-3 proteins, but not infection is a large risk factor7, these analyses indicated that latent
homologous type 2 proteins. A possible candidate is an antigen from viral DNA load after primary infection is unlikely to further influence
EBNA-3A that enables type 1-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activ- the risk of developing multiple sclerosis (MR–Egger P = 0.52; Fig. 5d
ity and is B*08:01-restricted51,52. Conditional association analyses that and Extended Data Fig. 12e), despite UKB participants with multiple
included B*08:01 as a covariate suggested that this haplotype accounts sclerosis having higher EBV DNA load (P = 0.005). For systemic lupus
for most of the type-specific association signal in the MHC region, with erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, which also associated with
some remaining associations of variation in the MHC class I and II regions higher EBV DNA load in UKB (P = 4.6 × 10−7 and 2.2 × 10−23, respectively),
(Fig. 4g). Mendelian randomization analyses were inconclusive about causality
(Extended Data Fig. 12f,g).
By contrast, all analyses (across the 4 Mendelian randomization
EBV DNA load is a risk factor for Hodgkin’s lymphoma
methods) suggested that viral DNA load after EBV infection significantly
We next sought to identify associations between viral DNA load and the influences the development of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (P = 1.2 × 10−3
abundant biological and clinical phenotypes available for the 490,401 to 0.014; Fig. 5e,f and Supplementary Table 15). Effect estimates
UKB research participants. We identified 181 significant associations for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and
between viral DNA load and disease phenotypes, and 366 with blood lymphoid leukaemia were smaller and not consistently significant
count, biomarker and metabolite measurements (Bonferroni-corrected across Mendelian randomization approaches, suggesting specificity
P < 0.05; Fig. 5a and Supplementary Tables 10–13). Most of the disease for Hodgkin’s lymphoma (Extended Data Fig. 12h–j). Moreover, EBV
associations involved higher viral DNA loads in affected individuals DNA abundance in people without Hodgkin’s lymphoma at the time
(Extended Data Fig. 12a), and many associated diseases involved inflam- of blood draw for WGS was quantitatively predictive of their likeli-
mation or weakened immune function, such as AIDS, anaemia, diabetes hood to go on to develop Hodgkin’s lymphoma (OR = 2.01 [1.40, 2.84]
and renal failure (Fig. 5a). Organ transplantation associated strongly for incident Hodgkin’s lymphoma among EBV DNA-positive versus
with increased anellovirus DNA load, presumably reflecting use of DNA-negative individuals; Fig. 5g). Increased EBV viral DNA load in
post-transplant immunosuppression medication14. Concordantly, blood—which could reflect a higher proportion of latently infected
individuals taking common immunosuppressive drugs had elevated B cells—may increase the opportunities for oncogenic transformation
EBV and anellovirus DNA loads (Supplementary Table 14); this could leading to Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
explain some of the observed disease associations. Carrier status for
endogenous HHV-6B or HHV-6A did not significantly associate with any
Discussion
biological or clinical phenotypes (Supplementary Table 10).
Many of the strongest associations of EBV and HHV-7 DNA load with Here, by profiling common DNA viruses in blood and saliva in popula-
disease phenotypes were directly or indirectly related to smoking (for tion sequencing data, we have characterized the major factors that
example, nicotine dependence, respiratory disorders and lung cancer; are likely to shape these constituents of the human virome. Human
Fig. 5a and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11). Cumulative smoking expo- genetics, age, sex, time of day, month of the year and smoking behaviour
sure (pack-years) strongly associated with increased prevalence of EBV consistently associate strongly with viral DNA load across many viruses,
DNA, which was nearly twice as high for the heaviest smokers compared but the relative magnitudes and even directions of these effects are
with nonsmokers (P = 3.3 × 10−195; Fig. 5b). By contrast, smoking exposure often virus-specific. These results on common, latent viruses, made
associated with decreased prevalence of HHV-7 DNA (P = 9.6 × 10−22; possible by cross-sectional analyses across over 900,000 biobank
Fig. 5b). Cigarettes smoked per day associated with similar trends participants, complement previous insights from targeted studies
(P = 3.3 × 10−563 and 2.7 × 10−9 for increased EBV prevalence and decreased of highly pathogenic viruses. These results also corroborate parallel
HHV-7 prevalence, respectively; Fig. 5c), suggesting that smoking has studies of EBV in UKB and AoU57–59; here, we extended these analyses to
strong, opposite effects on viral DNA load for EBV and HHV-7. These asso- 30 other viruses, and for EBV, we also observed interactions of genetic
ciations were replicated in AoU blood samples (Extended Data Fig. 12b) effects with biosample type and with EBV genetic variation.
and in AoU saliva samples; smoking associated with an increase not only The largely distinct, polygenic human genetic effects that we
in EBV prevalence (P = 3.6 × 10−18) but also in EBV abundance among observed for DNA load of several common viruses (EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7,
EBV DNA-positive individuals (P = 4.2 × 10−8, Extended Data Fig. 12c,d). MCPyV and anelloviruses) expand on earlier work identifying key loci
The large number of genetic effects on EBV DNA load identified by influencing control of HIV16,17 and hepatitis C18,48 load. The MHC region
our GWAS provided an opportunity to investigate the causal direction contributed the strongest genetic effects for each virus that we studied
of phenotypic associations—that is, whether viral DNA load affects except HHV-6B, similar to other GWAS of infectious disease pheno-
(or is affected by) the clinical phenotypes with which it associates. types60, but the specific HLA alleles that influenced viral DNA load
We did this by using these DNA load-influencing SNPs as instrument varied across viruses (Supplementary Table 8). These virus-specific
variables for Mendelian randomization, testing whether or not the effects at the MHC locus probably contribute to the prominent vari-
genetic variants that associate with viral DNA load also associate ation of viral DNA load that we observed across genetic ancestries,
with the traits with which viral DNA load associates in populations53. which is likely to reflect the balancing selection that has shaped human
Whereas most viral DNA load–phenotype associations are likely to be genetic variation affecting the immune system; alleles that confer an
a consequence of pathology, treatment, or environmental exposures advantage against a particular virus may increase susceptibility to
(such as smoking) leading to increased viral DNA presence in blood, other pathogens61. Beyond the MHC, polygenic influences on DNA load
the finding that the alleles that increase risk for viral DNA load also of different viruses were likewise largely distinct, sometimes surpris-
consistently confer risk for disease offers evidence that viral DNA ingly so: for example, variation at MX2 and PML, which encode host
load is causally upstream. factors thought to be broadly restrictive against herpesviruses39,40,
8 | Nature | www.nature.com
a b
Pack years of smoking
c
d e
f g
Nature | www.nature.com | 9
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo
ecnelaverP
reveN
25 EBV P = 3.3 × 10–195
20
15
10
5
HHV-7 P = 9.6 × 10–22
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
Cigarettes smoked per day
)%(
sdaer
lariv
fo ecnelaverP
reveN remroF
30
25
Multiple sclerosis
20
EBV P = 3.3 × 10–563
15
HHV-7 P = 2.7 × 10–9
10
5
0
1 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Odds ratio for s.d. increase in
EBV reads
dohteM
Hodgkin's lymphoma
ConMix
MR–Egger
IVW
Weighted
median
0.0625 0.25 1 24 816 64 0.0625 0.25
Odds ratio for s.d. increase in
EBV reads
dohteM
ConMix
MR–Egger
IVW
Weighted
median
1 24 816 64
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Effect size on EBV DNA load (s.d. units)
oitar
sddo
amohpmyl
s’nikgdoH
2.0
1.8
15
1.6
1.4
1.2 10
1.0
5
0.8
0
EBV read pairs
amohpmyl
s'nikgdoH
tnedicni
fo
etaR
)000,01
rep(
pu-wollof
gnirud
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco (F17)
Unspecified HIV disease (B24)
EBV Other rheumatoid arthritis (M06)
Depressive episode (F32)
Other peripheral vascular diseases (I73)
Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (J44) HHV7
Varicella (chickenpox) (B01)
Transplanted organ and tissue status (Z94)
Other and unspecified types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (C85)
TTV (VT416) Other anaemias (D64)
Agranulocytosis (D70)
Unspecified renal failure (N19)
Transplanted organ and tissue status (Z94)
Other and unspecified types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (C85)
TTV (TUS01) Unspecified diabetes mellitus (E14)
Chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25)
Chronic renal failure (N18)
Presence of cardiac and vascular implants and grafts (Z95)
Abnormalities of breathing (R06)
TTV (HD14a) Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (E11)
Unspecified renal failure (N19)
Angina pectoris (I20)
0.8 1 2 5 10
Odds ratio
0 1 2 ≥3
Fig. 5 | Associations of viral DNA load with clinical phenotypes and smoking. of 1 (no effect). ConMix, contamination mixture; IVW, inverse-variance
a, Associations of clinical conditions with detectable virus (presence of viral weighted; MR, Mendelian randomization. e, Estimates of the causal effect of
DNA sequences in blood WGS) in UKB participants with European ancestry EBV DNA load on risk for Hodgkin’s lymphoma (meta-analysis of 2,529 cases
(n = 453,770). Several of the strongest independent associations are shown; and 1,159,394 controls). Mendelian randomization odds ratios are expected
the full set of associations is provided in Supplementary Tables 10 and 11. to be overestimated due to measurement noise (Methods). f, Effect sizes for
b, Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity (green) and HHV-7 positivity (blue) 44 common genetic variants (at distinct non-MHC loci)—used as instrument
by smoking pack-years in UKB (n = 379,233 participants with European ancestry). variables in Mendelian randomization—for EBV DNA load (x axis) and risk for
Never smokers are also shown. c, Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity Hodgkin’s lymphoma (y axis). The line shown is from the MR–Egger test; the
(green) and HHV-7 positivity (blue) by cigarettes smoked per day in UKB y intercept is not significantly different from OR = 1, indicating low pleiotropy
(n = 438,101 participants with European ancestry). Never smokers and former of the genetic instruments. g, Incidence rates of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (during
smokers are also shown. d, Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load approximately 15 years of follow-up; n = 174 incident cases), stratified by the
(exposure; n = 638,825) on risk for multiple sclerosis (outcome; meta-analysis number of EBV DNA fragments in UKB blood WGS data, for individuals without
of 7,907 cases and 1,474,810 controls) using different Mendelian randomization a Hodgkin’s lymphoma diagnosis at the time of sample collection. Error bars
approaches (y axis) with 44 non-MHC loci as instrument variables. An estimate represent 95% confidence intervals. P values by two-sided linear regression (b,c).
is plotted in green if its 95% confidence interval does not overlap an odds ratio
Article
associated with DNA load of HHV-7 but not EBV. We also highlight the 6. Hjalgrim, H. et al. Characteristics of Hodgkin’s lymphoma after infectious mononucleosis.
utility of using pairs of related phenotypes, such as type 1 and type 2 N. Engl. J. Med. 349, 1324–1332 (2003).
7. Bjornevik, K. et al. Longitudinal analysis reveals high prevalence of Epstein–Barr virus
EBV DNA load (Fig. 4) or EBV DNA load in blood and saliva (Extended associated with multiple sclerosis. Science 375, 296–301 (2022).
Data Fig. 9i,j), as a mechanism to accomplish fine-mapping of a complex 8. Robinson, W. H., Younis, S., Love, Z. Z., Steinman, L. & Lanz, T. V. Epstein–Barr virus as a
potentiator of autoimmune diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 20, 729–740 (2024).
genetic association.
9. Moustafa, A. et al. The blood DNA virome in 8,000 humans. PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006292
The large number of polygenic effects that we observed for EBV (2017).
DNA load—45 human genomic loci—enabled Mendelian randomiza- 10. Liu, S. et al. Genomic analyses from non-invasive prenatal testing reveal genetic
associations, patterns of viral infections, and Chinese population history. Cell 175,
tion to evaluate the causality of associations with clinical phenotypes
347–359.e14 (2018).
(Fig. 5). These analyses suggested that multiple sclerosis risk from 11. Koonin, E. V., Dolja, V. V. & Krupovic, M. The healthy human virome: from virus–host
EBV infection may be mediated largely by adaptive immune response symbiosis to disease. Curr. Opin. Virol. 47, 86–94 (2021).
to an EBV infection62, without an additional influence of subsequent 12. Gulley, M. L. & Tang, W. Laboratory assays for Epstein–Barr virus-related disease. J. Mol.
Diagn. 10, 279–292 (2008).
lifetime viral DNA load. By contrast, EBV DNA load appears to be a 13. Saag, M. S. et al. HIV viral load markers in clinical practice. Nat. Med. 2, 625–629 (1996).
causal risk factor for Hodgkin’s lymphoma. This result contrasts with 14. Focosi, D. et al. Assessment of prevalence and load of torquetenovirus viraemia in a large
cohort of healthy blood donors. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 26, 1406–1410 (2020).
a Mendelian randomization analysis from a parallel study that did
15. Chen, C.-J. et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological gradient of serum
not observe an effect of EBV DNA load on Hodgkin’s lymphoma58; hepatitis B virus DNA level. JAMA 295, 65–73 (2006).
this discrepancy might be explained by increased statistical power 16. Fellay, J. et al. A whole-genome association study of major determinants for host control
of HIV-1. Science 317, 944 (2007).
here (from Hodgkin’s lymphoma GWAS summary statistics from a
17. McLaren, P. J. et al. Polymorphisms of large effect explain the majority of the host genetic
2.6-fold larger meta-analysis, as well as more EBV DNA load GWAS contribution to variation of HIV-1 virus load. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 14658–14663
hits available as genetic instruments) and inclusion versus exclusion (2015).
18. Ge, D. et al. Genetic variation in IL28B predicts hepatitis C treatment-induced viral
of the MHC region. This result could potentially be validated in vitro
clearance. Nature 461, 399–401 (2009).
by exposing germinal centre B cells to increasing titres of EBV and 19. Kamatani, Y. et al. A genome-wide association study identifies variants in the HLA-DP
measuring the number of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells locus associated with chronic hepatitis B in Asians. Nat. Genet. 41, 591–595 (2009).
20. Thomas, D. L. et al. Genetic variation in IL28B and spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C
produced63; alternatively, it could be studied in humanized mice64
virus. Nature 461, 798–801 (2009).
if HRS cell generation requires a tissue niche. An effect on Hodgkin’s 21. Rubicz, R. et al. A genome-wide integrative genomic study localizes genetic factors
lymphoma is not unexpected given the risk of EBV-positive Hodgkin’s influencing antibodies against Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1). PLoS Genet.
9, e1003147 (2013).
lymphoma conferred by infectious mononucleosis6, but it sug-
22. Kachuri, L. et al. The landscape of host genetic factors involved in immune response to
gests that interindividual differences in lifetime management of DNA common viral infections. Genome Med. 12, 93 (2020).
load affect health risks beyond infection itself. If so, interventions that 23. The UK Biobank Whole-Genome Sequencing Consortium. Whole-genome sequencing of
490,640 UK Biobank participants. Nature 645, 692–701 (2025).
reduce EBV DNA load could potentially decrease the risk of Hodgkin’s
24. Bick, A. G. et al. Genomic data in the All of Us Research Program. Nature 627, 340–346
lymphoma. Notably, smoking has previously been found to be a risk (2024).
factor for EBV-positive Hodgkin’s lymphoma (OR = 1.81 [1.27−2.56] 25. The SPARK Consortium SPARK: A US cohort of 50,000 families to accelerate autism
research. Neuron 97, 488–492 (2018).
for current smokers), but not for EBV-negative Hodgkin’s lymphoma
26. Kanakry, J. A. et al. The clinical significance of EBV DNA in the plasma and peripheral
(OR = 1.02 [0.72–1.44])65 and more weakly for non-Hodgkin’s lym- blood mononuclear cells of patients with or without EBV diseases. Blood 127, 2007–2017
phoma (OR = 1.10 [1.00–1.20])66, suggesting that the effect of smoking (2016).
27. Chisaka, H., Morita, E., Yaegashi, N. & Sugamura, K. Parvovirus B19 and the pathogenesis
on EBV DNA load might be one mechanism that underlies Hodgkin’s
of anaemia. Rev. Med. Virol. 13, 347–359 (2003).
lymphoma subtype-specific risk. Similarly, antivirals such as acyclic 28. Flamand, L. et al. Endogenous human herpesviruses 6A/B. J. Virol. 0, e01054–25 (2025).
nucleoside analogues that inhibit herpesvirus DNA polymerases and 29. Liu, X. et al. Endogenization and excision of human herpesvirus 6 in human genomes.
PLoS Genet. 16, e1008915 (2020).
reduce EBV viral load in blood67 may be worth evaluation for potential 30. Spandole, S., Cimponeriu, D., Berca, L. M. & Mihăescu, G. Human anelloviruses: an
prophylactic benefit against Hodgkin’s lymphoma. update of molecular, epidemiological and clinical aspects. Arch. Virol 160, 893–908
Our analyses of human viruses that are commonly observable from (2015).
31. Loyo, M. et al. Quantitative detection of Merkel cell virus in human tissues and possible
population DNA sequencing data had several limitations that will need mode of transmission. Int. J. Cancer 126, 2991–2996 (2010).
further efforts to resolve using analytical approaches that more com- 32. Klein, S. L. & Flanagan, K. L. Sex differences in immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16,
pletely capture viral genetic variation, additional cohorts of greater 626–638 (2016).
33. Bastiaanssen, T. F. S. et al. Kronos: a computational tool to facilitate biological rhythmicity
scale, and samples obtained from a wider range of body sites (Supple- analysis. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.04.21.537503 (2023).
mentary Note 10). We envision that biobank WGS data will continue to 34. Li, Q. et al. Epstein–Barr virus uses HLA class II as a cofactor for infection of B lymphocytes.
be a powerful resource for virology and epidemiology, particularly in J. Virol. 71, 4657–4662 (1997).
35. Saveanu, L. et al. IRAP identifies an endosomal compartment required for MHC class I
geographic regions with a greater burden of certain DNA viruses such as cross-presentation. Science 325, 213–217 (2009).
hepatitis B and retroviruses such as HIV and human T lymphotropic virus. 36. Stamogiannos, A., Koumantou, D., Papakyriakou, A. & Stratikos, E. Effects of polymorphic
variation on the mechanism of endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1. Mol. Immunol.
67, 426–435 (2015).
37. Andrés, A. M. et al. Balancing selection maintains a form of ERAP2 that undergoes
Online content nonsense-mediated decay and affects antigen presentation. PLoS Genet. 6, e1001157
(2010).
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
38. Willis, T. G. & Dyer, M. J. S. The role of immunoglobulin translocations in the pathogenesis
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl- of B-cell malignancies. Blood 96, 808–822 (2000).
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions 39. Scherer, M. & Stamminger, T. Emerging role of PML nuclear bodies in innate immune
signaling. J. Virol. 90, 5850–5854 (2016).
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability
40. Schilling, M. et al. Human MxB protein is a pan-herpesvirus restriction factor. J. Virol. 92,
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10288-y. e01056-18 (2018).
41. Verstrepen, L. et al. Expression, biological activities and mechanisms of action of A20
(TNFAIP3). Biochem. Pharmacol. 80, 2009–2020 (2010).
1. Liang, G. & Bushman, F. D. The human virome: assembly, composition and host interactions. 42. Tan, M. & Jiang, X. Norovirus and its histo-blood group antigen receptors: an answer to a
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 514–527 (2021). historical puzzle. Trends Microbiol. 13, 285–293 (2005).
2. Damania, B., Kenney, S. C. & Raab-Traub, N. Epstein–Barr virus: biology and clinical disease. 43. Kubiniok, P. et al. Understanding the constitutive presentation of MHC class I
Cell 185, 3652–3670 (2022). immunopeptidomes in primary tissues. iScience 25, 103768 (2022).
3. Grebely, J. et al. Hepatitis C virus clearance, reinfection, and persistence, with insights from 44. Hirayasu, K. & Arase, H. Functional and genetic diversity of leukocyte immunoglobulin-
studies of injecting drug users: towards a vaccine. Lancet Infect. Dis. 12, 408–414 (2012). like receptor and implication for disease associations. J. Hum. Genet. 60, 703–708
4. Khan, G., Miyashita, E. M., Yang, B., Babcock, G. J. & Thorley-Lawson, D. A. Is EBV (2015).
persistence in vivo a model for B cell homeostasis? Immunity 5, 173–179 (1996). 45. Miller, L. H., Mason, S. J., Clyde, D. F. & McGinniss, M. H. The resistance factor to
5. Ho, D. D., Moudgil, T. & Alam, M. Quantitation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in Plasmodium vivax in blacks — the Duffy-blood-group genotype, FyFy. N. Engl. J. Med.
the blood of infected persons. N. Engl. J. Med. 321, 1621–1625 (1989). 295, 302–304 (1976).
10 | Nature | www.nature.com
46. Reich, D. et al. Reduced neutrophil count in people of African descent is due to a 61. Barreiro, L. B. & Quintana-Murci, L. From evolutionary genetics to human immunology:
regulatory variant in the Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines gene. PLoS Genet. 5, how selection shapes host defence genes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 17–30 (2010).
e1000360 (2009). 62. Lanz, T. V. et al. Clonally expanded B cells in multiple sclerosis bind EBV EBNA1 and
47. Sample, J. et al. Epstein–Barr virus types 1 and 2 differ in their EBNA-3A, EBNA-3B, and GlialCAM. Nature 603, 321–327 (2022).
EBNA-3C genes. J. Virol. 64, 4084–4092 (1990). 63. Küppers, R. et al. Identification of Hodgkin and Reed–Sternberg cell-specific genes by
48. Ansari, M. A. et al. Genome-to-genome analysis highlights the effect of the human gene expression profiling. J. Clin. Invest. 111, 529–537 (2003).
innate and adaptive immune systems on the hepatitis C virus. Nat. Genet. 49, 666–673 64. Fujiwara, S., Imadome, K.-I. & Takei, M. Modeling EBV infection and pathogenesis in
(2017). new-generation humanized mice. Exp. Mol. Med. 47, e135 (2015).
49. Zanella, L. et al. A reliable Epstein–Barr virus classification based on phylogenomic and 65. Kamper-Jørgensen, M. et al. Cigarette smoking and risk of Hodgkin lymphoma and its
population analyses. Sci Rep. 9, 9829 (2019). subtypes: a pooled analysis from the International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium
50. Zimber, U. et al. Geographical prevalence of two types of Epstein–Barr virus. Virology 154, (InterLymph). Ann. Oncol. 24, 2245–2255 (2013).
56–66 (1986). 66. Morton, L. M. et al. Cigarette smoking and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a pooled
51. Moss, D. J. et al. Cytotoxic T-cell clones discriminate between A- and B-type Epstein–Barr analysis from the International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium (InterLymph). Cancer
virus transformants. Nature 331, 719–721 (1988). Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 14, 925–933 (2005).
52. Burrows, S. R., Sculley, T. B., Misko, I. S., Schmidt, C. & Moss, D. J. An Epstein–Barr virus- 67. Hoshino, Y. et al. Long-term administration of valacyclovir reduces the number of Epstein–
specific cytotoxic T cell epitope in EBV nuclear antigen 3 (EBNA 3). J. Exp. Med. 171, Barr virus (EBV)-infected B cells but not the number of EBV DNA copies per B cell in healthy
345–349 (1990). volunteers. J. Virol. 83, 11857–11861 (2009).
53. Sanderson, E. et al. Mendelian randomization. Nat. Rev. Methods Primer 2, 6 (2022).
54. Kurki, M. I. et al. FinnGen provides genetic insights from a well-phenotyped isolated Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
population. Nature 613, 508–518 (2023). published maps and institutional affiliations.
55. Bycroft, C. et al. The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data.
Nature 562, 203–209 (2018). Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
56. Verma, A. et al. Diversity and scale: genetic architecture of 2068 traits in the VA Million 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
Veteran Program. Science 385, eadj1182 (2024). and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
57. Nyeo, S. S. et al. Population-scale sequencing resolves determinants of persistent EBV credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
DNA. Nature 650, 664–672 (2026). and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
58. Schmidt, A. et al. Host control of persistent Epstein–Barr virus infection. Nature https:// included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10274-4 (2026). to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
59. Yasumizu, Y. et al. Host genetic architecture between Epstein–Barr virus activity and intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
multiple sclerosis reveals shared pathways. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.64898/ need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,
2025.12.11.25342083 (2025). visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
60. Kwok, A. J., Mentzer, A. & Knight, J. C. Host genetics and infectious disease: new tools,
insights and translational opportunities. Nat. Rev. Genet. 22, 137–153 (2021). © The Author(s) 2026
Nature | www.nature.com | 11
Article
Methods that our main goal was to identify effects of human genetics, age, sex
and environmental exposures (such as smoking) on viral DNA load,
Ethics and we only had statistical power to detect such effects for commonly
This research complies with all relevant ethical regulations. The study observed viruses. Working with a smaller set of common viruses
protocol (NHSR-8429) was determined to be not human subject allowed us to perform careful QC on WGS-based quantifications of viral
research by the Broad Institute Office of Research Subject Protection DNA load, which was important given the potential for read alignment
as all data analysed were previously collected and de-identified. Use of artefacts.
SPARK data for this research was approved by SFARI (project 3350.2).
Measurement of viral DNA presence and abundance in WGS
UK Biobank, All of Us, and SPARK WGS data samples
All WGS data analysed in this work were generated in previous studies. In the UKB (blood), AoU (blood and saliva) and SPARK (saliva) WGS
For all cohorts, PCR-free methods were used in library preparation datasets, we first extracted unmapped reads (that is, reads that did not
and sequencing was done on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 machines. WGS align to the GRCh38 human reference genome) and reads that aligned
from UKB23 was performed on libraries prepared with NEBNext Ultra to the chrEBV decoy contig. We realigned these reads to the reference
II PCR-free kit (New England Biolabs) using blood-derived DNA from panel of 31 viral genomes (merged into a single reference for align-
490,401 individuals at the deCODE facility in Reykjavik, Iceland and the ment) using BWA-MEM74 (v.0.7.18) with 4 threads (-t 4). We took this
Wellcome Sanger Institute (Sanger), Cambridge, UK. Sequencing reads read-mapping-based approach following Moustafa et al.9, who observed
were aligned to human reference build GRCh38 graph genome with minimal additional detection of viral sequences from blood-derived
Illumina DRAGEN Bio-IT Platform Germline Pipeline v.3.7.8. Samples WGS upon using de novo assembly followed by protein-based search.
were sequenced to an average coverage of 32.5×. After realignment, each virus’ genome was then scanned to identify
WGS from the NIH All of Us v8 cohort24 was performed on blood and regions with excessive numbers of alignments suggestive of accumu-
saliva-derived DNA from 414,817 individuals (365,918 blood-derived lated misalignments originating from some other source of DNA (for
and 48,899 saliva-derived samples). Sequencing reads from librar- example, mismapped human DNA) by first computing alignment cov-
ies prepared with PCR-Free Kapa HyperPrep library construction kit erage aggregated across all samples in each dataset (UKB, AoU blood,
were aligned to human reference build GRCh38 with Illumina DRAGEN AoU saliva and SPARK, each analysed separately). To do so, for each
Bio-IT Platform Germline Pipeline v.3.4.12. Samples were sequenced sample, we used mosdepth75 (v.0.3.9) to compute depth-of-coverage
to an average coverage of 37.9×. in each 500-bp window of each viral reference genome (--by 500); we
WGS from the SPARK cohort of the Simons Foundation Autism skipped per-base depth output (-n) and mate overlap/CIGAR corrections
Research Initiative (SFARI)25 was performed on saliva-derived DNA (--fast-mode), restricted to reads passing default filters on SAM flags
from 12,519 individuals. Sequencing reads from libraries prepared (-F 1796, which excludes duplicate reads), and filtered to reads with
with Illumina DNA PCR-Free Library Prep kit were aligned to human mapping quality ≥5 (-Q 5) for which their mates mapped to the same
reference build GRCh38 with BWA-MEM by the New York Genome reference genome with an insert size in the range 100–1,000 bp (-l 100
Center (NYGC) using Centers for Common Disease Genomics project -u 1000). The results of these filters were not sensitive to the choice of
standards. Samples were sequenced to an average coverage of 42×. the mapping quality threshold; using a more stringent threshold (-Q 20)
Details of saliva sample collection, DNA extraction, and sequencing affected only a few percent of reads attributed to common viruses and
were described in ref. 68 (which analysed data from sequencing waves had a negligible effect on downstream genetic association analyses.
WGS1–3 of the SPARK integrated WGS (iWGS) v.1.1 dataset; here we Upon computing the 500 bp-resolution coverage profile of each
analysed WGS1–5, which included additional samples included in sub- viral genome of each sample, we computed the coverage profile of
sequent sequencing waves). each virus (that is, for each 500-bp bin, what fraction of samples had
Genotypes of genome-wide human genetic variants (SNPs and non-zero coverage) within each cohort (UKB, AoU blood, AoU saliva
insertion–deletions) were previously generated for all three data- and SPARK). For each virus, for each cohort, we flagged a subset of
sets. For UKB, we analysed genotypes previously imputed into UKB 500-bp regions for exclusion based on having coverage exceeding
SNP-array data55 using the TOPMed reference panel69 (as the final UKB the following threshold:
WGS genotype call set was not available at the time of analysis). For AoU
4×(Q −Q)+Q +5
and SPARK, we analysed genotypes previously called from WGS using 3 1 3
DRAGEN (AoU24) and DeepVariant (SPARK25).
where Q and Q are the first and third quartiles, respectively, of the dis-
1 3
Selection of viral reference genomes tribution of alignment coverage across all 500 bp regions of that virus’
We selected a panel of 31 viruses for which to profile viral DNA load (Sup- genome in that cohort. This expression corresponds to a lenient ‘Tukey
plementary Table 1) based on previous work that identified the most fence’, which is an outlier removal boundary defined based on adding
prevalent viruses observed in blood-derived DNA sequencing data from a multiple of the interquartile range (Q–Q) to the third quartile (Q).
3 1 3
8,240 individuals9. Additional viral reference genomes were included We used a lenient Tukey fence to retain regions with modest elevation
to more comprehensively represent viral families previously observed. of coverage (as such regions may still have a majority of alignments
For example, adenovirus was represented by Human adenovirus type derived from the viral genome), and we added a constant offset of 5 to
7 and human adenovirus E (type 4) reference genomes, as these are handle situations in which the first and third quartiles have the same
two of the most commonly observed in adults70, and polyomavirus value. Applying this bin-level filtering strategy per virus per cohort
was represented by a set of common types (1/BK, 2/JC, 3/KI, 4/WU, 5/ helped handle cohort-specific error modes of false positive viral align-
MC, 6, 7)71,72. Undetected herpesviruses (HSV-2 and VZV) were added ments that might arise from heterogeneity in WGS data generation
given the high general prevalence of EBV and HHV-7. To maximize rep- and processing (for example, details of how reads had previously been
resentation of the diversity of anellovirus genomes while limiting the aligned to the human reference genome, which impacted which reads
size of the viral reference panel, we selected a representative from each did and did not map to human chromosomes).
of the five recently described anellovirus clades with available NCBI For association analyses of viral DNA load with biological and clinical
reference genomes73 (Extended Data Fig. 1a). phenotypes, these measures of viral DNA load were then converted into
The rationale for prioritizing a smaller set of viruses to profile (rather binary ‘viral DNA positivity’ indicators of presence or absence of reads
than attempting to comprehensively characterize viral diversity) was from a given virus in each individual. For genetic association analyses
of viral DNA load in blood, the number of viral read pairs mapping to For AoU participants, previously generated genetically inferred
each genome (obtained by summing mosdepth 500-bp bin depth ancestry24 and ancestry admixture estimates from Rye78 were used.
values across non-excluded bins and multiplying by 500/300 = (bin For SPARK participants, genetic ancestry was inferred using Euclid-
size)/(bases per read pair)) was inverse-normal transformed to capture ean distance on 10 genome-wide ancestry principal components to clus-
quantitative information about viral abundance while limiting the ter centres determined from the subset of individuals who self-reported
influence of outlier samples. In saliva samples, in which viral reads race. For each ancestry group, a cluster centre was chosen to have the
were often much more abundant, two phenotypes were generated for median principal component coordinate for each principal compo-
genetic association analyses: viral DNA positivity (binary presence or nent among individuals who self-reported a corresponding race. As
absence of reads), and a quantitative abundance metric in which we in UKB, all individuals that fell within a Euclidean distance radius that
applied inverse-normal transform to non-zero values (that is, masking enclosed a large majority of individuals self-reporting that race were
individuals with no reads from a given virus) after normalizing read then assigned to that genetically inferred ancestry. For European ances-
pair counts for library size. This allowed for the possibility of observ- try, the radius was set to include 90% of individuals who self-reported
ing effects on viral prevalence but not abundance and vice versa. For as ‘white’ (n = 8,157). For African ancestry, the radius was set to include
associations with sex (Fig. 2c,d), the cohort used for analysis (UKB 90% of individuals who self-reported as ‘African American’ (n = 345).
or AoU for blood; AoU or SPARK for saliva) was chosen to maximize For American ancestry, the radius was set to include 75% of individu-
prevalence and/or representation of an age range with a larger sex dif- als who self-reported as ‘Hispanic’ or ‘Native American’ (n = 906). For
ference; for SPARK, which used a family design, analyses of sex effects East Asian ancestry, the radius was set to include 75% of individuals
were restricted to parents. who self-reported as ‘Asian’ and were separated from the majority of
samples on PC2 (n = 342). For South Asian ancestry, the radius was
Estimation of the number of EBV-derived reads expected to be set to include 75% of individuals who self-reported as ‘Asian’ and were
present in blood WGS separated from the majority of samples on PC4 (n = 144).
To assess the reasonableness of the distribution of viral read counts
observed in blood WGS (typically 0 or 1 read pair per sample, even HLA allele imputation in UK Biobank
for near-ubiquitous herpesviruses; Fig. 1b), we roughly estimated The T1DGC reference panel for HLA allele imputation79 (n = 5,225) was
the number of EBV-derived reads expected per WGS sample as follows. first converted to VCF format with variants lifted over to hg19 and
On average, EBV is present in 1 out of 100,000 B cells4 with roughly 100 merged into multiallelic sites where appropriate. A small number of
episomes per infected cell67. Assuming B cells comprise roughly 5% individuals (n = 136) with >2 alleles for at least one multiallelic site were
of all white blood cells76 yields an expected 5 × 10−5 EBV genomes per excluded from the reference panel. Imputation of HLA alleles onto
white blood cell, or 2.5 × 10−5 EBV genomes per haploid human genome phased SNP-array haplotypes80 was done with BEAGLE81 (v.5.4) using
in blood-derived WGS. The EBV reference genome is 171,823 bp, so default parameters, after which imputed alleles were converted back to
WGS at 30x coverage of the human genome by 2x150bp read pairs biallelic variants for genetic association analysis and lifted over to hg38.
should produce an expected 0.4 read pairs from the EBV genome per
sample. Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
phenotypes in UK Biobank
Association of viral DNA prevalence with sample collection time Abundances of reads aligning to reference genomes for EBV, HHV-6B,
Collection time for blood samples in UKB was obtained from field 3166. HHV-7 and anellovirus strains TUS01, VT416 and HD14a were
For analyses of collection time for saliva-derived WGS in the AoU cohort, inverse-normal transformed into quantitative phenotypes for GWAS.
we excluded a large fraction of samples (62%) that we determined were Individuals were excluded based on the following criteria: not having
likely to have been mailed; for such samples, recorded collection times European genetic ancestry, not having available TOPMed-imputed
corresponded to receipt of samples rather than time of saliva sampling. genotypes (including for chromosome X), and/or having withdrawn,
Specifically, samples were excluded if they lacked an in-person physi- leaving 453,770 individuals for genetic association analyses (447,190
cal measurement for heart rate or had a heart rate measurement time for HHV-6B after removal of individuals with endogenous HHV-6
separated by more than a day from WGS sample collection time. The integration). TOPMed-imputed variants for these individuals were
recorded collection times for the 18,751 remaining samples were con- filtered to require minor allele frequency >0.001 and INFO > 0.3. Lin-
verted from UTC to local time by taking the modal time zone of the state ear mixed model association tests were performed with BOLT-LMM82
containing the three-digit zip code for the corresponding individual. (v.2.5) to account for relatedness, using the following covariates: age,
P values for hour-of-day and month-of-year associations (Fig. 2e,f and age squared, sex, genotype array, assessment centre and 20 genetic
Extended Data Fig. 3k–n) were calculated with ANOVA by comparing principal components. SNP array genotypes were used for model fit-
models with and without hour of the day or month of the year. Both hour ting, and linkage disequilibrium scores derived from European-ancestry
of the day and month of the year were encoded as a series of indicator 1KGP samples were used for test statistic calibration. GWAS of
variables to allow for non-linear relationships with viral prevalence. germline-inherited endogenous HHV-6A and HHV-6B carrier status
All models included age, age squared, sex, assessment centre, and were performed using linear regression with the same covariates in
top genetic principal components as covariates (20 principal compo- individuals of European genetic ancestry, excluding one from each
nents for UKB; 16 principal components for AoU). Associations were pair of relatives with second-degree or closer relatedness83.
confirmed with Kronos (v.1.0.0), which was run with default settings; To identify index variants outside the MHC region (Supplementary
to handle covariates, viral phenotypes were first adjusted for covariate Table 7), we first iteratively selected the strongest association and
effects estimated using harmonic regression. removed any variants within 1 Mb. Index variant pairs within 3 Mb were
then evaluated to determine whether they represented independent
Association of viral DNA prevalence with genetic ancestry associations using the following approximation of the association
For UKB, genetically inferred ancestry was determined as described strength of the index variant i conditional on the more strongly associ-
previously77. In brief, 20 genome-wide ancestry principal components ated index variant j:
were used to identify groups of individuals within a Euclidean distance
2
radius from the centre of individuals within each self-reported ethnicity  χ2
category, with the distance threshold chosen to include a large fraction
χ2≈χ2
1−rsign(ββ)
j 
i|j i  ij i j χ2
of individuals in that self-reported ethnicity category.  i 
Article
as previously described84. The less-strongly associated variant i was from GWAS for other viruses due to a minor change in the analytical
dropped if its approximate conditional association was no longer pipeline during the course of the project.
genome-wide significant (P < 5 × 10−8). Identified index variants were GWAS was also performed on AoU participants with African ancestry
annotated with nearby genes using GENCODE 39 (ref. 85) definitions for for inverse normal transformed EBV and HHV-7 abundances in blood
protein-coding genes, long non-coding RNAs, and microRNAs. Index WGS (n = 77,573). Variants from the ACAF threshold call set with minor
variants were annotated as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) allele frequency >0.5% in gnomAD v.4.1 African-ancestry samples were
and splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTLs) using the v.10 release of filtered to those with minor allele frequency >0.1% and allele count ≥40
GTEx86. Follow-up genetic association analyses of variants in the MHC in the subset of African-ancestry samples used. BOLT-LMM (using the
region including both TOPMed-imputed variants and imputed HLA --lmmInfOnly flag, as the non-infinitesimal mixed model provided a neg-
alleles were performed using linear regression with BOLT-LMM on ligible increase in statistical power) was run with SNP-array genotypes
unrelated individuals with European ancestry with the same covariates (minor allele frequency >1%, missingness <10% in African-ancestry sam-
(Supplementary Table 8). ples) as model SNPs, with the following covariates: age, age squared,
sex, sequencing site and 16 genetic principal components.
Partitioning of heritability between MHC and non-MHC
variation Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load
To partition heritability between common variants within and out- phenotypes in SPARK
side the MHC region of the human genome, BOLT-REML87 (v.2.5) was As an auxiliary analysis, we also performed GWAS of viral DNA load
run on SNP-array genotypes for unrelated UKB participants with phenotypes from SPARK saliva WGS. Abundances of reads aligning to
European ancestry with variants within the range chr. 6:24000000 reference genomes for HHV-7, HHV-6B, and Merkel cell polyomavirus
to chr. 6:35000000 assigned to one component (MHC region) and all were transformed into up to two GWAS phenotypes for each virus: a
other variants assigned to a second component, with the --remlNoRefine binary phenotype encoding the presence/absence of any viral reads
option set. Age, age squared, sex, assessment centre, genotyping array, (HHV-6B, n = 9,081 after sample exclusions; MCPyV, n = 9,209) and
and the top 20 genetic ancestry principal components were included a quantitative phenotype comprising inverse normal transformed
as covariates. non-zero values (HHV-6B, n = 6,258; HHV-7, n = 7,360). Individuals with
non-European genetic ancestry were excluded using a more permis-
Rare variant association analyses in UK Biobank sive ancestry definition based on genomic PC1 and PC2 to maximize
Gene-level burden masks were generated as previously described88 power, leaving 9,209 individuals for genetic association analyses. For
using genotypes of rare protein-coding variants in the UKB DRAGEN HHV-6B, carriers of eHHV-6B were also excluded. Variants called by
WGS dataset and genotypes of copy number variants previously ascer- DeepVariant were filtered and used to generate ancestry principal
tained from UKB whole-exome sequencing data89. The specific burden components as previously described83. Linear mixed model associa-
masks analysed here for association with viral DNA load used a minor tion tests were performed using BOLT-LMM to account for relatedness,
allele frequency threshold of MAF < 0.001 and included missense using the following covariates: age, square root of age, age squared,
variants with PrimateAI-3D90 scores >0.7 merged with loss-of-function sex, sequencing batch, percentage of mapped reads and ten genetic
SNPs, insertion–deletions and copy number variants, using only principal components.
the MANE Select transcript91. Association tests were performed We observed that GWAS power in SPARK saliva WGS was much lower
using linear regression (implemented in BOLT-LMM) on unrelated than in AoU saliva WGS, as expected given the much smaller sample
European-ancestry individuals with age, age squared, sex, assessment size. We therefore chose not to meta-analyse saliva viral DNA load GWAS
centre, genotyping array and the 20 genetic principal components results across AoU and SPARK because the potential power gain was
included as covariates. Genes in the MHC region (chr. 6:24000000 modest (given the much smaller size of the SPARK cohort) and might
to chr. 6:35000000) were excluded given the potential for linkage be negated by the age heterogeneity of SPARK (mostly children) versus
disequilibrium with strong common-variant associations, leaving AoU (only adults).
17,589 gene burden masks and a Bonferroni threshold of 5.7 × 10−7
(adjusting for five viruses included in these analyses: EBV, HHV-7 Meta-analysis of GWAS results from UK Biobank and All of Us
and 3 TTVs). Associations with EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7 and anellovirus strains TUS01,
VT416, and HD14a DNA load in blood in AoU were meta-analysed with
Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load those from UKB using METAL92 (v.2020-05-05) in standard error mode
phenotypes in All of Us (SCHEME STDERR), restricting to variants with minor allele frequency
GWAS was performed on AoU participants with European ancestry for greater than 0.1% (for EBV and HHV-7) or 1% (for HHV-6B and anellovi-
the following phenotypes: inverse-normal transformed EBV, HHV-6B, ruses) in both cohorts (ADDFILTER MAF > 0.001 or 0.01), and applying
HHV-7 and anellovirus strains TUS01, VT416 and HD14a abundances genomic control correction within input studies (GENOMICCONTROL
in blood WGS (n = 201,168 for EBV, 198,059 for HHV-6B, and 200,091 ON). One significantly associated locus in UKB that disagreed in direc-
for other viruses), EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7 and MCPyV DNA positivity tion of effect between cohorts (and between EBV presence phenotypes
(that is, presence of any EBV reads) in saliva WGS (n = 33,164 for EBV, generated from left and right halves of the EBV genome; Supplementary
32,711 for HHV-6B, and 33,050 for other viruses), and inverse-normal Note 5) was filtered.
transformed EBV (n = 16,282) and HHV-7 (n = 29,989) abundances in To compute genetic correlation between viral phenotypes in UKB,
DNA-positive saliva WGS samples. Variants from the allele count/allele AoU, and SPARK, LDSC93 (v.2.0.0) was run with standard settings and
frequency (ACAF) threshold call set present in the TOPMed-r2 impu- pairs of viral summary statistics as input.
tation panel (to exclude those in regions of poor mappability) were
filtered to those with minor allele frequency >0.1% and allele count ≥40 Generation of lymphocyte percentage phenotype in All of Us
in the subset of European ancestry samples used. BOLT-LMM was run A lymphocyte percentage phenotype was generated from the ‘Lym-
with SNP-array genotypes (minor allele frequency >1%, missingness phocytes/100 leukocytes in blood by automated count’ phenotype
<10% in European-ancestry samples) as model SNPs, with the follow- (OMOP Concept Id: 3037511). Only entries with ‘percent’, ‘percent of
ing covariates: age, age squared, sex, sequencing site, and 16 genetic white blood cells’, ‘percent’ and ‘percentage unit’ as units were kept,
principal components. For EBV GWAS, samples without a sex call of XX discarding entries with other or missing units as well as values outside
or XY were assigned indicator variables, whereas they were excluded the range [0,100]. For individuals with multiple valid measurements,
we took the median value. This left 170,196 people with lymphocyte The third phenotype, used in case-case association analyses of EBV
percentage values, among whom 24,789 individuals with with African type 1 versus type 2 positivity, coded individuals who were type
ancestry had blood-derived WGS available and were used to evaluate 2-positive and lacked type 1-specific alignments as cases (n = 1,366),
the extent to which the Duffy-null effects on EBV and HHV-7 DNA load and those who were type 1-positive and lacked type 2-specific align-
were mediated by effects on lymphocyte percentage. ments as controls (n = 9,817); a small number of individuals deter-
mined to be positive for both type 1 and type 2 were excluded (n = 126).
Measurement of EBV type 1- and type 2-specific alignments Association tests were performed using linear regression (implemented
In both UKB and SPARK, unmapped reads and reads that aligned to the in BOLT-LMM) on unrelated individuals with European ancestry with
chrEBV decoy contig were realigned to the EBV type 1 (NC_007605.1) age, age squared, sex, genotype array, assessment centre and 20 genetic
and EBV type 2 (NC_009334.1) reference genomes using BWA-MEM principal components as covariates.
(providing both reference genomes simultaneously and using 4 com-
putational threads). Read alignments were filtered to those for which Association analyses of viral DNA load with biological and
both the read and its mate were mapped (samtools view -F 12) and were clinical phenotypes in UK Biobank
then collated within 500 bp bins of each of the two reference genomes Binarized viral DNA positivity phenotypes were tested for association
using mosdepth with the same parameters as above, with the exception with binary disease phenotypes in ICD-10 categories derived from
that the filter on insert size (-l 100 -u 1000) was dropped, as insert size UKB ‘first occurrence’ data fields (fields under category 1712, which
was undefined in situations in which a read mapped to EBV type 1 and merged data from electronic health records and self-report) and cancer
its mate to EBV type 2 or vice versa (for example, if only one read in the registry data (field 40006). For each virus, we tested only binary dis-
pair fell within a type-informative region, and its non-type-informative ease phenotypes for which at least 5 cases were expected among viral
mate was mapped arbitrarily to type 1 or type 2). A 1 kb offset was added DNA-positive individuals for that virus (comprising 493–1,413 tests for
to alignment bin coordinates in the type 1 genome starting at position each of eight common viruses tested: EBV, HHV-6B, HHV-7, three TTVs
85000 to account for differences between the two reference genomes and eHHV-6A and eHHV-6B). Bonferroni correction was applied to the
in the EBNA3A–EBNA3C region. Alignments to 500 bp bins within the full set of tests performed across all eight viruses. Association tests
viral genomic regions 35501–38000 and 79001–92500 (corresponding were performed using logistic regression with Firth correction using
to EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C) were considered to be type-specific, the Wald approximation (pl = FALSE) as implemented in the logistf
and the numbers of type 1-specific and type 2-specific reads for each R package (v.1.26.0) on participants with European ancestry with age,
sample were computed by summing 500 bp depths across these regions age squared, sex, assessment centre and the 20 genetic principal com-
(separately for the two EBV genomes), multiplying by 500/150 = (bin ponents as covariates.
size)/(bases per read), and rounding to the nearest integer. In UKB, Viral DNA positivity phenotypes were also tested for association
samples with at least two type 1-specific reads were designated as posi- with quantitative blood phenotypes in UKB: blood counts (category
tive for EBV type 1, and analogously for type 2. 100081), blood biochemistry (category 17518), and NMR metabolomics
To evaluate the risk of misclassification between type 1 and type 2, (category 220). Association tests were performed using linear regres-
we examined the distribution of type 2 versus type 1 reads in SPARK sion on individuals with European ancestry with the above covariates,
saliva samples, making use of the fact that saliva samples frequently and Bonferroni correction was applied considering all pairwise tests of
have hundreds of EBV reads that should typically come from only quantitative blood phenotypes with viral DNA positivity phenotypes.
one EBV type (depending on whether the individual is infected with a Binary immunosuppressive drug phenotypes were generated by
type 1 or type 2 EBV strain). This analysis showed that as expected, aggregating synonymous terms from self-reported medication data
nearly all samples had read counts heavily skewed to either type 1 or (category 100075). Specifically, methotrexate was generated from the
type 2 (typically >99% type 1 or >99% type 2), indicating a low rate of union of individuals reporting ‘methotrexate’ or ‘mtx – methotrexate’;
misclassification of reads. cyclosporin from ‘cya - cyclosporin’, ‘ciclosporin product’, ‘csa - cyclo-
sporin a’, ‘cya - cyclosporin a’, ‘cyclosporin’, ‘cyclosporin product’ or
Variation in EBV type 1 versus type 2 frequency by birthplace of ‘ciclosporin’; and corticosteroids from ‘prednisone’, ‘prednisolone’,
UK Biobank participants ‘methylprednisolone’, ‘prednisolone product’, ‘dexamethasone’,
For analyses of individuals born in the UK, geographic boundaries for ‘fludrocortisone’, ‘hydrocortisone’, ‘cortisone product’, ‘hydrocorti-
nine regions in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland were sone product’ or ‘cortisone’.
obtained as a GeoJSON file corresponding to ‘NUTS, level 1 (January Quantitative smoking phenotypes in UKB were generated from the
2018) Boundaries UK BFC’ (for EBV type analyses) or ‘NUTS, level 2 pack-years and cigarettes per day phenotypes by encoding never smok-
(January 2018) Boundaries UK BFC’ (for total EBV analyses) from the ers (and, for cigarettes per day, former smokers) as 0 values. These
Open Geography portal from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) smoking phenotypes were tested for association with viral DNA positiv-
(https://geoportal.statistics.gov.uk). Birth coordinates for individuals ity phenotypes using linear regression on individuals with European
born in the UK (fields 129 and 130) were assigned to regions with these ancestry with the above covariates.
boundaries using the R package sf (v.1.0-20), and the proportion of
participants positive for EBV type 2 (among EBV-positive individuals) Mendelian randomization to identify causal effects of EBV DNA
was estimated as the ratio of the number of samples determined to be load on disease
EBV type 2-positive to the total number of samples determined to be Instrument variables for Mendelian randomization analyses were identi-
either EBV type 1-positive or type 2-positive. For country-level analyses, fied as the 44 lead variants at non-MHC loci from the GWAS meta-analysis
fields 1647 and 20115 were used. of EBV DNA load in UKB and AoU. The MHC region was excluded from
Mendelian randomization analyses given the likelihood of linkage dis-
Genetic association analyses of MHC variants with EBV-type equilibrium generating pleiotropic effects of MHC haplotypes on many
DNA load phenotypes immune-related phenotypes. To minimize the impact of sample overlap
Variants in the MHC region of the human genome (including imputed between cohorts used in the exposure GWAS (EBV DNA load in UKB+AoU
HLA alleles) were tested for association with three binary EBV DNA load blood WGS) and outcome GWAS (disease phenotypes in FinnGen plus
phenotypes derived from EBV type-specific read alignments. The first UKB plus MVP), we regenerated GWAS summary statistics for EBV DNA
two phenotypes coded EBV type 1-positive individuals (respectively, load in UKB after restricting to a control-only sub-cohort94. Specifi-
type 2-positive individuals) as cases and all other individuals as controls. cally, we reran BOLT-LMM after removing UKB participants with the
Article
following ICD-10 phenotypes: G35, C81, C82, C83, C84, C85, C91, M05, workspace (https://workbench.researchallofus.org/workspaces/
M06 and M32. GWAS results from this control-only UKB sub-cohort were aou-rw-77ec99c5/kamitakietalthednaviromevarieswithhumangene-
then meta-analysed with AoU associations to generate effect sizes and sandenvironments/data).
standard errors for use in Mendelian randomization.
GWAS summary statistics for outcome phenotypes of interest were
Code availability
downloaded from https://mvp-ukbb.finngen.fi/ after applying for
access. In these GWAS, FinnGen phenotypes had been harmonized The following publicly available software resources were used: bwa
over ICD-8, ICD-9 and ICD-10, cancer-specific ICD-O-3, (NOMESCO) (v.0.7.18, https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/), mosdepth (v.0.3.9, https://
procedure codes, Finnish-specific Social Insurance Institute (KELA) github.com/brentp/mosdepth), bcftools (v.1.14, http://www.htslib.
drug reimbursement codes and ATC-codes collected from various org/), samtools (v.1.15.1, http://www.htslib.org/), plink (v.1.90b6.26
registries. MVP phenotypes had been defined by ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes and v.2.00a3.7, https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/), BEAGLE (v.5.4,
from electronic health records grouped into corresponding phecodes, https://faculty.washington.edu/browning/beagle/beagle.html), BOLT-
with case status defined as having two or more phecode-mapped ICD-9 LMM (v.2.5, https://alkesgroup.broadinstitute.org/BOLT-LMM/),
or ICD-10 codes. Meta-analyses had been performed by identifying phe- METAL (v.2020-05-05, https://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/METAL),
notypes with concordant endpoints, as described at https://finngen. qqman R package (v.0.1.8, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
gitbook.io/documentation/methods/meta-analysis. We used the qqman/index.html), sf R package (v.1.0-20, https://cran.r-project.
MendelianRandomization R package95 (v.0.10.0) with default settings org/web/packages/sf/index.html), logistf R package (v.1.26.1, https://
to generate estimates of causal effect sizes of EBV DNA load on disease cran.r-project.org/web/packages/logistf/index.html) and Mendelian-
phenotypes using the weighted median, inverse-variance weighted Randomization R package (v.0.10.0, https://cran.r-project.org/web/
(IVW), MR–Egger, and contamination mixture (ConMix) approaches. packages/MendelianRandomization/index.html).
For weighted median, IVW, and MR–Egger, robust regression with penal-
ized weights was used to account for invalid instrument variables96. 68. Manghi, P. et al. Large-scale metagenomic analysis of oral microbiomes reveals markers
for autism spectrum disorders. Nat. Commun. 15, 9743 (2024).
We caution that effect size estimates from Mendelian randomization
69. Taliun, D. et al. Sequencing of 53,831 diverse genomes from the NHLBI TOPMed Program.
(here, the increase in log-odds of disease per s.d. increase in EBV reads; Nature 590, 290–299 (2021).
Fig. 5e) are expected to be overestimated when the exposure variable 70. Gray, G. C. et al. Adult adenovirus infections: loss of orphaned vaccines precipitates
military respiratory disease epidemics. Clin. Infect. Dis. 31, 663–670 (2000).
(here, EBV DNA load) is measured with high noise. For example, were
71. Kamminga, S., van der Meijden, E., Feltkamp, M. C. W. & Zaaijer, H. L. Seroprevalence of
the exposure phenotype to be randomly permuted in a subset of sam- fourteen human polyomaviruses determined in blood donors. PLoS ONE 13, e0206273
ples, this would leave the s.d. of the exposure unchanged, but it would (2018).
72. Gossai, A. et al. Seroepidemiology of human polyomaviruses in a US population. Am. J.
shrink down the effect sizes (betas) of the instrumental variables. The
Epidemiol. 183, 61–69 (2016).
betas of instrument variables are used as independent variables in the 73. Arze, C. A. et al. Global genome analysis reveals a vast and dynamic anellovirus landscape
regression analysis used to estimate Mendelian randomization effect within the human virome. Cell Host Microbe 29, 1305–1315.e6 (2021).
74. Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform.
sizes (x axis of Fig. 5f), such that shrinking the betas of the instrument
Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760 (2009).
variables would then increase the slope of the Mendelian randomization 75. Pedersen, B. S. & Quinlan, A. R. Mosdepth: quick coverage calculation for genomes and
regression, causing the estimated effect size from Mendelian randomi- exomes. Bioinformatics 34, 867–868 (2018).
76. Kleiveland, C. R. in The Impact of Food Bioactives on Health: in vitro and ex vivo models
zation to increase. This behaviour contrasts with how measurement
(eds Verhoeckx, K. et al.) Ch. 15 (Springer, 2015).
noise in the exposure variable impacts direct analyses of association 77. Hujoel, M. L. A. et al. Insights into DNA repeat expansions among 900,000 biobank
with the outcome variable (Fig. 5g): in such analyses, noise reduces participants. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09886-z (2026).
78. Conley, A. B. et al. Rye: genetic ancestry inference at biobank scale. Nucleic Acids Res. 51,
the observed association.
e44 (2023).
79. Jia, X. et al. Imputing amino acid polymorphisms in human leukocyte antigens. PLoS ONE
Reporting summary 8, e64683 (2013).
80. Loh, P.-R., Genovese, G. & McCarroll, S. A. Monogenic and polygenic inheritance become
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port- instruments for clonal selection. Nature 584, 136–141 (2020).
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article. 81. Browning, B. L., Zhou, Y. & Browning, S. R. A one-penny imputed genome from next-
generation reference panels. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 103, 338–348 (2018).
82. Loh, P.-R. et al. Efficient Bayesian mixed-model analysis increases association power in
large cohorts. Nat. Genet. 47, 284–290 (2015).
Data availability
83. Kamitaki, N. et al. Human and bacterial genetic variation shape oral microbiomes and
The following data resources are available by application: UK Biobank health. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-10037-7 (2026).
84. Hujoel, M. L. A. et al. Influences of rare copy-number variation on human complex traits.
(http://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), All of Us Research Program (https:// Cell 185, 4233–4248.e27 (2022).
allofus.nih.gov/), SFARI SPARK (https://www.sfari.org/resource/ 85. Frankish, A. et al. GENCODE: reference annotation for the human and mouse genomes in
spark/), MVP-Finngen-UKBB meta-analysis summary statistics (https:// 2023. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D942–D949 (2023).
86. THE GTEX Consortium The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across
mvp-ukbb.finngen.fi/) and T1DGC HLA imputation panel (https:// human tissues. Science 369, 1318–1330 (2020).
repository.niddk.nih.gov/study/173). The following data resources 87. Loh, P.-R. et al. Contrasting genetic architectures of schizophrenia and other complex
diseases using fast variance-components analysis. Nat. Genet. 47, 1385–1392 (2015).
are publicly available: human reference genome build GRCh38
88. Tang, D., Kamitaki, N., Mukamel, R. E., Rubinacci, S. & Loh, P.-R. Patterns and drivers of
(https://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/ 43,617 mosaic chromosomal alterations in blood. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/
GRCh38_reference_genome/), TOPMed-r2 imputation panel variant 10.1101/2025.07.30.25332451 (2025).
89. Hujoel, M. L. A. et al. Protein-altering variants at copy number-variable regions influence
list (https://imputation.biodatacatalyst.nhlbi.nih.gov/), gnomAD
diverse human phenotypes. Nat. Genet. 56, 569–578 (2024).
v.4.1 variant call set (https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/), linkage 90. Gao, H. et al. The landscape of tolerated genetic variation in humans and primates.
disequilibrium score resources (https://alkesgroup.broadinstitute. Science 380, eabn8153 (2023).
91. Morales, J. et al. A joint NCBI and EMBL–EBI transcript set for clinical genomics and
org/LDSCORE/), NCBI Virus for reference sequences (https://www.
research. Nature 604, 310–315 (2022).
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/), PrimateAI-3D scores (https://pri- 92. Willer, C. J., Li, Y. & Abecasis, G. R. METAL: fast and efficient meta-analysis of genomewide
mateai3d.basespace.illumina.com/), GENCODE 39 definitions (https:// association scans. Bioinformatics 26, 2190–2191 (2010).
93. Bulik-Sullivan, B. et al. An atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases and traits.
www.gencodegenes.org/) and GTEx expression and splice quantita-
Nat. Genet. 47, 1236–1241 (2015).
tive trait associations (https://gtexportal.org/home/). Full viral DNA 94. Burgess, S., Davies, N. M. & Thompson, S. G. Bias due to participant overlap in two-sample
load GWAS summary statistics are available from the GWAS Catalog Mendelian randomization. Genet. Epidemiol. 40, 597–608 (2016).
95. Yavorska, O. O. & Burgess, S. MendelianRandomization: an R package for performing
under accessions GCST90809801 to GCST90809829. Viral DNA load
Mendelian randomization analyses using summarized data. Int. J. Epidemiol. 46, 1734–1739
phenotypes for AoU participants are available in the Controlled Tier (2017).
96. Rees, J. M. B., Wood, A. M., Dudbridge, F. & Burgess, S. Robust methods in Mendelian 1 OT2 OD026553; 1 OT2 OD026548; 1 OT2 OD026551; 1 OT2 OD026555; IAA no. AOD 16037;
randomization via penalization of heterogeneous causal estimates. PLoS ONE 14, Federally Qualified Health Centers: HHSN 263201600085U; Data and Research Center:
e0222362 (2019). 5 U2C OD023196; Biobank: 1 U24 OD023121; The Participant Center: U24 OD023176;
97. Salzer, U. & Grimbacher, B. TACI deficiency—a complex system out of balance. Curr. Participant Technology Systems Center: 1 U24 OD023163; Communications and Engagement:
Opin. Immunol. 71, 81–88 (2021). 3 OT2 OD023205; 3 OT2 OD023206; and Community Partners: 1 OT2 OD025277; 3 OT2
98. Slob, E. A. W. & Burgess, S. A comparison of robust Mendelian randomization methods OD025315; 1 OT2 OD025337; and 1 OT2 OD025276. In addition, the All of Us Research
using summary data. Genet. Epidemiol. 44, 313–329 (2020). Program would not be possible without the partnership of its participants.
Author contributions N.K., S.A.M. and P.-R.L. conceived the study design. N.K. performed
Acknowledgements We thank C. Usher for edits to text and figures. This research was computational and statistical analyses. D.T. annotated functional coding variants and
conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under application number 40709. We are grateful generated the gene burden masks for rare variant associations in UK Biobank. N.K., S.A.M.
to all of the families in SPARK, the SPARK clinical sites and SPARK staff. We acknowledge and P.-R.L. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors.
access granted to SPARK genetic data on SFARI Base. N.K. was supported by US NIH
Fellowship F31 DE034283. S.A.M. was supported by US NIH grant R01 HG006855 and the Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Howard Hughes Medical Institute. P.-R.L. was supported by US NIH grants R56 HG012698
and R01 HG013110 and a Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award at the Scientific Interfaces. Additional information
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, the decision to publish Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
or the preparation of the manuscript. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10288-y.
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. Computational analyses Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Nolan Kamitaki,
were performed on the O2 High Performance Compute Cluster supported by the Research Steven A. McCarroll or Po-Ru Loh.
Computing Group at Harvard Medical School (http://rc.hms.harvard.edu), the UKB Research Peer review information Nature thanks Jacques Fellay who co-reviewed with Ali Saadat;
Analysis Platform, and the All of Us Researcher Workbench. The All of Us Research Program Emma Thomson, Shaopu Wang and the other, anonymous reviewer for their contribution to
is supported by the NIH, Office of the Director: Regional Medical Centers: 1 OT2 OD026549; the peer review of this work. Peer review reports are available.
1 OT2 OD026554; 1 OT2 OD026557; 1 OT2 OD026556; 1 OT2 OD026550; 1 OT2 OD026552; Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Viral DNA load quantification, associations with European ancestry UKB participants (n = 434,573, y-axis) stratified by number
blood counts, and identification of endogenous HHV-6 chromosomal of reads mapping to the parvovirus B19 genome (x-axis). P-value is from
integrants. a) Locations of the five representative anellovirus reference regression of log-transformed reticulocyte counts on log-transformed B19
genomes included in the viral reference panel relative to other anellovirus reads with sex, age, age-squared, assessment center, and 20 genetic principal
genomes in the multidimensional scaling projection from ref. 73. b) Prevalence components as covariates. g) Numbers of reads aligned to the HHV-6A (x-axis)
and abundance of viral DNA sequences in blood samples from AoU (n = 365,918). and HHV-6B (y-axis) genomes in blood-derived WGS from UKB. Threshold
c) Prevalence of viral DNA sequences in blood by lymphocyte percentage lines shown were used to determine carriers of endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B.
(rounded to the nearest integer) in European-ancestry UKB participants A few individuals carrying both integrants are in the top right quadrant.
(n = 441,026). P-values are from a model including sex, age, age-squared, h) Prevalence and abundance of viral DNA sequences in saliva samples from AoU
assessment center, and 20 genetic principal components as covariates. Error (n = 48,899). i) Analogous to g, for saliva-derived WGS from SPARK (n = 12,519).
bars, 95% CIs. d) Prevalence of viral DNA sequences in saliva-derived WGS by j) Prevalence and abundance of viral DNA sequences in saliva samples from
age (rounded to the nearest month) in SPARK for children under 3 years old children without autism spectrum disorder in SPARK (n = 2,220). k) Prevalence
(total n = 576; n = 1, 2, 5, 6, 4, 8, 4, 4 for the 0-month to 7-month bins; 7 ≤ n ≤ 45 and abundance of viral DNA sequences in saliva samples from children with
for remaining bins). e) Pairwise enrichments of co-observing reads from two autism spectrum disorder in SPARK (n = 3,540).
viruses in the same UKB sample. * for p < 0.01. f) Reticulocyte counts of
Article
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Coverage of viral genomes by aligned WGS reads. are arising from sparse sampling of viral genomes across people; misalignments
For each virus commonly detected in UKB blood WGS or SPARK saliva WGS, from homologous sequences in the human genome would appear as spikes in
the proportion of samples containing reads in 500 bp regions spanning the viral genomic coverage. Additional metrics on coverage in each cohort can be
indicated virus’ genome is plotted. Evenness of coverage indicates that reads found in Supplementary Tables 2–5.
Extended Data Fig. 3 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Additional data supporting age, sex, circadian, and sample collection split by assessment center. i) Prevalence of EBV DNA
seasonal associations with viral DNA load in saliva. a) Abundance of viral sequences in UKB blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to
DNA sequences in saliva-derived WGS by age (rounded to the nearest year) in the nearest hour) split by season (winter, Dec-Feb; spring, Mar-May; summer,
SPARK. Sample sizes for each virus are in the following panel legends. Error Jun-Aug; autumn, Sep-Nov). j) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA sequences in UKB
bars, 95% CIs. b) Abundance of EBV DNA sequences by age in SPARK saliva blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to the nearest hour)
WGS, stratified by sex. P-values are from a joint model containing both sex split by season. k) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences by sample collection time
and an interaction term between sex and age (n = 4,753). Error bars, 95% CIs. of day (rounded to the nearest hour) in AoU saliva WGS (n = 18,751). P-values are
c) Analogous to b, for HHV-7 DNA sequences (n = 9,978). d) Analogous to b, for from an ANOVA test between models with and without hour of the day. Error
HHV-6B DNA sequences (n = 8,528). e) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences in UKB bars, 95% CIs. l) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences by sample collection month
blood WGS by time of day of sample collection (rounded to the nearest hour) of year in AoU saliva WGS. P-values are from an ANOVA test between models
split by assessment center (n = 490,136). f) Prevalence of EBV DNA sequences in with and without collection month. Error bars, 95% CIs. m) Lymphocyte
UKB blood WGS data by month of sample collection split by assessment center. percentage in UKB blood samples by sample collection time of day (n = 472,115).
g) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA sequences in UKB blood WGS by time of day of Error bars, 95% CIs. n) Lymphocyte percentage in UKB blood samples by sample
sample collection (rounded to the nearest hour) split by assessment center. collection month. Error bars, 95% CIs.
h) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA sequences in UKB blood WGS data by month of
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Variation in viral DNA load in blood and saliva by WGS data from AoU by proportion of estimated American ancestry admixture
genetic ancestry. a) Prevalence (population frequency) of detectable EBV (for individuals with estimated >90% European plus American ancestry,
DNA positivity (reads that align to the EBV genome) in blood-derived WGS n = 184,514). Error bars, 95% CIs. h) Analogous to g, for proportion of estimated
data by ancestry in UKB (genetically inferred, n = 474,353). Error bars, 95% CIs. African ancestry admixture for AoU participants with estimated >90%
Per-ancestry prevalences and abundances can be found in Supplementary European plus African ancestry (n = 168,651). Admixture proportions of
Table 6. b) Prevalence of EBV DNA positivity in blood-derived WGS data by 10–30% African ancestry were excluded due to low sample numbers (n < 500).
genetic ancestry in AoU (n = 365,918). Error bars, 95% CIs. c) Prevalence of i) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA positivity in blood-derived WGS data by genetic
EBV DNA positivity in saliva-derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in AoU ancestry in UKB (n = 474,353). Error bars, 95% CIs. j) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA
(n = 48,899). Error bars, 95% CIs. d) Abundance of EBV DNA sequences in positivity in blood-derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in AoU (n = 365,918).
saliva-derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in AoU (n = 25,915). Error bars, Error bars, 95% CIs. k) Prevalence of anellovirus DNA positivity in blood-
95% CIs. e) Analogous to c, for saliva-derived WGS in adults (≥20 years old) derived WGS data by genetic ancestry in UKB (n = 474,353). Error bars, 95% CIs.
from SPARK (n = 5,691). f) Analogous to d, for saliva-derived WGS in adults l) Prevalence of anellovirus DNA positivity in blood-derived WGS data by genetic
from SPARK (n = 2,730). g) Prevalence of EBV DNA positivity in blood-derived ancestry in AoU (n = 365,918). Error bars, 95% CIs.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Genome-wide association analyses of HHV-6B and (n = 447,190) and AoU (n = 198,059) European-ancestry sub-cohorts.
anellovirus (HD14a and VT416 TTV strains) DNA load in blood. a) Genome- b) Analogous to a, for the anellovirus HD14a strain (UKB n = 453,770;
wide associations of human genetic variants with HHV-6B DNA load in blood AoU n = 200,091). c) Analogous to a, for the anellovirus VT416 strain
(inverse-normal transformed abundance), meta-analyzed across UKB (UKB n = 453,770; AoU n = 200,091).
Extended Data Fig. 6 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load (inverse-normal transformed abundance, restricted to individuals whose
in saliva. a) Genome-wide associations of human genetic variants with EBV DNA saliva WGS had detectable viral DNA) to capture effects on the frequency and
positivity in saliva-derived WGS from European-ancestry AoU participants amount of secreted virus. b) Analogous to a, for EBV abundance (n = 16,282).
(n = 33,164). Given the bimodal distribution of viral DNA load in saliva, in which c) Analogous to a, for HHV-7 positivity (n = 33,050). d) Analogous to a, for HHV-7
samples containing virally-aligned reads often had hundreds or thousands of abundance (n = 29,989). e) Analogous to a, for HHV-6B positivity (n = 32,711).
reads, we performed GWAS both on binarized viral DNA load (presence/absence Carriers of endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B germline integrations were
of any reads from the virus) and quantitative viral DNA load phenotypes excluded. f) Analogous to a, for Merkel cell polyomavirus positivity (n = 33,050).
Extended Data Fig. 7 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Robustness of genetic associations with EBV and of effect sizes between UKB+AoU blood and AoU saliva; technical variation
HHV-7 DNA load and GWAS for HHV-6 integration sites. a) Effect sizes for (e.g., in sample processing or DNA sequencing for saliva vs. blood samples)
index variants at 44 independent non-MHC EBV DNA load-associated loci for would generally be expected to increase or decrease signal-to-noise to the
association with presence of reads aligned to the left (x-axis) or right (y-axis) same extent across different genetic effects, which would not explain the
half of the EBV genome (n = 419,249 unrelated European ancestry participants). observed heterogeneity in saliva vs. blood effect size ratios. g) Analogous to f,
b) Analogous to a, for index variants at 34 independent non-MHC HHV-7 DNA for index variants at 40 independent HHV-7 blood or saliva DNA load-associated
load-associated loci. Two lower frequency variants of large effect size were loci. Two lower frequency variants of large effect size were excluded to facilitate
excluded to facilitate visualization of the remaining variants. c) Effect sizes for visualization of the remaining variants. h) Analogous to f, for index variants
index variants at 45 independent EBV blood DNA load-associated loci for at 5 independent HHV-6B blood or saliva DNA load-associated loci. i) Genetic
association with EBV DNA load in blood samples from UKB (x-axis; n = 453,770) correlations between viral phenotypes in UKB, AoU, and SPARK. UKB and AoU
and AoU (y-axis; n = 201,168). Line shown is the median ratio of effect sizes were included separately when statistical power was sufficient within each
between UKB and AoU. d) Analogous to c, for index variants at 35 independent cohort; for HHV6B and TTV (VT416), only the meta-analysis had sufficient
HHV-7 blood DNA load-associated loci. Two lower frequency variants of large power. Borders around cells indicate the same phenotype in different cohorts
effect size were excluded to facilitate visualization of the remaining variants. (e.g., UKB and AoU blood samples). * indicates p < 0.1 and ** for p < 0.01.
e) Analogous to c, for index variants at 3 independent HHV-6B blood DNA load- j) Genome-wide associations of human genetic variants with carrier status for
associated loci. f) Effect sizes for index variants at 45 independent EBV blood or endogenous HHV-6A germline integration (eHHV-6A) in unrelated European-
saliva DNA load-associated loci for association with EBV DNA load in blood ancestry UKB participants (n = 419,249). Peritelomeric peaks indicate
samples from UKB+AoU (x-axis; n = 453,770 + 201,168) and EBV presence in haplotypes in linkage disequilibrium with telomeric HHV-6A insertions.
saliva samples from AoU (y-axis; n = 33,164). Line shown is the median ratio k) Analogous to c, for endogenous HHV-6B germline integration (eHHV-6B).
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Analyses of serology data and comparison with viral WGS (x-axis) in EBV seropositive individuals (n = 8,325). P-value is from a
DNA load in blood. a) Associations of variants in the MHC region of the human linear regression model with standard covariates and rank-based inverse
genome with quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded EBNA-1 in UKB normal transformed EBV read counts. MFI, median fluorescence intensity.
serology measurements (y-axis, n = 8,100) and EBV DNA load in UKB blood WGS g) Analogous to f, for quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded EA-D.
(x-axis; n = 453,770). Serology measurements were from unrelated European h) Analogous to f, for quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded ZEBRA.
ancestry participants and associations were performed with BOLT-LMM using i) Analogous to f, for quantitative antibody response to EBV-encoded VCA-p18.
standard covariates. b) Analogous to a, for quantitative antibody response j) Quantitative antibody response to HHV-7-encoded U14 (y-axis) stratified by
to EA-D. c) Analogous to a, for quantitative antibody response to ZEBRA. HHV-7 DNA fragment count in UKB blood WGS (x-axis) in HHV-7 seropositive
d) Analogous to a, for quantitative antibody response to VCA-p18. e) Associations individuals (n = 8,341). P-value is from a linear regression model including
to quantitative antibody response to HHV-7 encoded U14 (y-axis) and HHV-7 standard covariates and rank-based inverse normal transformed HHV-7 read
DNA load (x-axis; n = 453,770). f) Quantitative antibody response to EBV- counts.
encoded EBNA-1 (y-axis) stratified by EBV DNA fragment count in UKB blood
Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | See next page for caption.
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Non-additive genetic effects and associations of in UKB (n = 454,545 European ancestry participants). Error bars, 95% CIs.
blood type and coding variants with viral DNA load in blood. a) Prevalence i) Associations of common genetic variants in the MHC region with EBV DNA
of detectable EBV positivity by age in UKB blood WGS, stratified by HLA- load in blood (UKB, n = 453,770 European ancestry participants; x-axis) and
DRB1*04:04 genotype (n = 452,318 European ancestry participants). Error bars, saliva (AoU, n = 33,168 European ancestry participants; y-axis). Variants (dots in
95% CIs. b) Prevalence of detectable HHV-7 positivity by age in UKB blood WGS, the scatter plot) are colored by linkage disequilibrium with rs12153924 (green-
stratified by genotype for a SNP in the MHC region at chr6:31345435. Error bars, to-pink shading), which tags the HLA-A*02:01 allele (r2 = 0.99). j) Effect sizes of
95% CIs. c) Effect sizes of index variants at 44 independent non-MHC loci HLA-A*02:01 on EBV DNA load in blood (green points; UKB, n = 453,770 European
associated with EBV DNA load in UKB blood WGS in DRB1*04:04 carriers (x-axis, ancestry participants; AoU, n = 201,181 European ancestry participants) and
n = 34,089) and DRB1*04:04 non-carriers (y-axis, n = 371,339). d) Effect sizes of saliva (gray points; AoU, n = 33,168 European ancestry participants; SPARK,
index variants at 23 independent non-MHC loci associated with HHV-7 DNA n = 9,209 European ancestry participants). For saliva, effect sizes are shown
load in UKB blood WGS in chr6:31345435 T/T homozygotes (x-axis, n = 167,251) for both a binary presence/absence phenotype and a quantitative phenotype
and C/C homozygotes (y-axis, n = 57,034). Three lower frequency variants of (inverse-normal transformed abundance, restricted to individuals whose
large effect size were excluded to facilitate visualization of the remaining saliva WGS had detectable EBV DNA). Error bars, 95% CIs. k) Prevalence of HHV-7
variants. e) Effect sizes of variants in the MHC region in DRB1*04:04 carriers DNA positivity by genetically determined blood type in UKB (n = 456,988
(x-axis, n = 34,089) and DRB1*04:04 non-carriers (y-axis, n = 371,339) on EBV European ancestry participants). Blood type was determined as in ref. 83.
DNA load in UKB blood WGS. Only variants with associations that reached l) Prevalence of HHV-7 DNA positivity by genotype combinations of common
genome-wide significance in both sample subsets are shown. HLA coding blood type alleles (O, B, A1, and A2) in UKB. m) Effect size on EBV DNA load
variants and classical alleles are highlighted in red. f) Prevalence of detectable for the CPVL Y168H missense variant and CPVL loss-of-function variants
EBV positivity by HLA-DRB1*04:04 and HLA-DRB1 T210 genotype combinations (aggregated across such variants in a burden test; n = 453,770). n) Effect size
in UKB blood WGS (n = 454,545 European ancestry participants). Error bars, on EBV DNA load for the TNFRSF13B C104R and A181E missense variants and
95% CIs. g) Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity by HLA-DRB1*04:04 and TNFRSF13B loss-of-function variants. TNFRSF13B coding variants (C104R,
HLA-DQA1 E198 genotype combinations in UKB blood WGS (n = 454,545 p = 2.3 × 10−14; A181E, p = 3.5 × 10−12) lead to impaired ligand binding and
European ancestry participants). Error bars, 95% CIs. h) Prevalence of EBV DNA downstream signaling97.
positivity by HLA-DRB1*04:04 and HLA-DPB1 V105 genotype combinations
Article
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Genome-wide association analyses of viral DNA load participants). The AFR sub-cohort analyzed here consisted of individuals with
in blood samples from African ancestry participants. a) Genome-wide 70–90% African ancestry (n = 51,052 participants) to minimize correlation of
associations of human genetic variants with EBV DNA positivity in blood-derived Duffy-null genotype with admixture proportion. Error bars, 95% CIs. d) Number
WGS from African-ancestry AoU participants (n = 77,573). b) Genome-wide of reads mapping to the EBV (n = 18,723 participants) and HHV-7 (n = 33,823
associations of human genetic variants with HHV-7 DNA positivity in blood- participants) genomes by genetic ancestry and Duffy-null genotype in AoU
derived WGS from African-ancestry AoU participants (n = 77,573). c) Prevalence saliva WGS. The AFR sub-cohort analyzed here consisted of individuals with
of detectable EBV and HHV-7 positivity (reads mapping to each viral genome) 70–90% African ancestry (n = 51,052 participants) to minimize correlation of
by genetic ancestry and Duffy-null genotype in AoU blood WGS (n = 251,209 Duffy-null genotype with admixture proportion. Error bars, 95% CIs.
Extended Data Fig. 11 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 11 | Validation of type-informative EBV genome regions either type 1 or type 2) by country of birth within the United Kingdom and
and assessment of quantitative antibody responses for EBV type 1 and Republic of Ireland, stratified by HLA-B*08:01 allele carrier status (n = 456,923).
type 2. a) Frequencies of observing WGS reads mapping to each 500 bp segment The effect of B*08:01 on EBV type 1 versus type 2 (decreasing the proportion of
of the EBV type 1 (black line) and type 2 (green line) reference genomes in blood individuals with EBV type 1 relative to type 2) appeared to be present across all
WGS samples from UKB (n = 490,401). Highlighted in gray are two regions used geographic regions of the United Kingdom, which vary in rates of EBV type 2
to distinguish EBV types, both containing genes with known type-specific prevalence (Fig. 5c). Error bars, 95% CIs. d) Proportion of UKB participants
sequences, EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C. Read alignments in these two regions positive for EBV DNA by region of birth within the United Kingdom. Map source:
show consistent ratios of type 1-aligned to type 2-aligned reads, whereas other Office for National Statistics, licensed under the Open Government Licence
EBV genomic regions (which are not type-informative) do not. b) Pairwise v.3.0 and Contains OS data. Crown copyright and database right 2017–2026.
correlations in the abundances of DNA sequences mapping to 500 bp segments e) Distribution of quantitative antibody response to VCA-p18 for EBV seropositive
of the EBV type 2 genome in saliva WGS samples from SPARK with >1 type- UKB participants with type-informative EBV DNA sequences exclusively from
specific alignment (n = 4,757). For each sample, read counts for each 500 bp bin the EBV type 1 (black) or type 2 (green) genomes (n = 335 with available serology
were first normalized by the maximum number of reads in any 500 bp region measurements). P-values are from linear regression including age, age-squared,
across the EBV type 1 and type 2 genomes. Regions used for downstream EBV sex, assessment center, and 20 ancestry PCs as covariates. MFI, median
type analyses (containing EBNA2 and EBNA3A–EBNA3C) are highlighted. The fluorescence intensity. f) Analogous to c, for quantitative antibody response
correlation heatmap shows that reads aligning to the EBV type 2 genome in to EBNA-1. g) Analogous to c, for quantitative antibody response to EA-D.
these two regions tended to occur in the same individuals. c) Proportion of UKB h) Analogous to c, for quantitative antibody response to ZEBRA.
participants positive for EBV type 2 reads (as a fraction of those positive for
Extended Data Fig. 12 | See next page for caption.
Article
Extended Data Fig. 12 | Additional data regarding associations of viral from OR = 1, indicating low pleiotropy of the genetic instruments. f) Estimates
DNA load with clinical phenotypes and smoking. a) Associations of clinical of the causal effect of EBV DNA load (exposure) on risk for systemic lupus
conditions with detectable viral positivity (presence of viral DNA sequences in erythematosus (outcome; meta-analysis of 3,491 cases and 1,361,247 controls)
blood WGS) in European-ancestry UKB participants (n = 453,770). Significant using different Mendelian randomization approaches (y-axis) with 44 non-MHC
associations (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.05) are colored by direction of effect. loci as instrument variables. An estimate is plotted in green if its 95% CI does
b) Prevalence of detectable EBV positivity (in green) and HHV-7 positivity not overlap an odds ratio of 1 (no effect). Error bars, 95% CIs. However, as these
(in blue) by cigarettes smoked per day in AoU blood samples (n = 365,918). results replicated inconsistently across MR approaches with different
Prevalences among individuals who have never smoked or formerly smoked are assumptions98, we do not conclude causality, but rather that viral DNA load
indicated by the square points on the left. Error bars, 95% CIs. c) Prevalence of is more likely to affect the risk of systemic lupus erythematosus compared
detectable EBV positivity in AoU saliva WGS (n = 48,899) by cigarettes smoked to MS. g) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for rheumatoid
per day. Prevalences among individuals who have never smoked or formerly arthritis (meta-analysis of 35,875 cases and 1,296,933 controls). Error bars,
smoked are indicated by the square points to the left. Error bars, 95% CIs. 95% CIs. h) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for lymphoid
d) Analogous to b, for mean EBV abundance (geometric mean among samples leukemia (meta-analysis of 5,966 cases and 1,248,154 controls). Error bars,
with at least one read pair). e) Effect sizes for 44 common genetic variants 95% CIs. i) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for non-Hodgkin
(at distinct non-MHC loci)—used as instrument variables in Mendelian lymphoma (meta-analysis of 13,198 cases and 1,273,062 controls). Error bars,
randomization—for EBV DNA load (x-axis; n = 638,825) and risk for multiple 95% CIs. j) Estimates of the causal effect of EBV DNA load on risk for chronic
sclerosis (y-axis; meta-analysis of 7,907 cases and 1,474,810 controls). The line lymphocytic leukemia (meta-analysis of 4,467 cases and 1,248,724 controls).
shown is from the MR-Egger test; the y-intercept is not significantly different Error bars, 95% CIs.
1
nature
portfolio
|
reporting
summary
April
2023
Corresponding author(s): Nolan Kamitaki
Last updated by author(s): Feb 11, 2026
Reporting Summary
Nature Portfolio wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Portfolio policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used for data collection.
Data analysis The following publicly available software resources were used: bwa (v0.7.18, https://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/), mosdepth (v0.3.9, https://
github.com/brentp/mosdepth), bcftools (v1.14, http://www.htslib.org/), samtools (v1.15.1, http://www.htslib.org/), plink (v1.90b6.26 and
v2.00a3.7, https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/), BEAGLE (v5.4, https://faculty.washington.edu/browning/beagle/beagle.html), BOLT-LMM
(v2.5, https://alkesgroup.broadinstitute.org/BOLT-LMM/), METAL (v2020-05-05, https://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/METAL), qqman R
package (v0.1.8, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/qqman/index.html), sf R package (v1.0-20, https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/sf/index.html), logistf R package (v1.26.1, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/logistf/index.html), and
MendelianRandomization R package (v0.10.0, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MendelianRandomization/index.html).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Portfolio guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
2
nature
portfolio
|
reporting
summary
April
2023
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
- For clinical datasets or third party data, please ensure that the statement adheres to our policy
The following data resources are available by application: UK Biobank (http://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), All of Us Research Program (https://allofus.nih.gov/), SFARI
SPARK (https://www.sfari.org/resource/spark/), MVP-Finngen-UKBB meta-analysis summary statistics (https://mvp-ukbb.finngen.fi/), and T1DGC HLA imputation
panel (https://repository.niddk.nih.gov/study/173). The following data resources are publicly available: human reference genome build GRCh38 (https://
ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/reference/GRCh38_reference_genome/), TOPMed-r2 imputation panel variant list (https://
imputation.biodatacatalyst.nhlbi.nih.gov/), gnomAD v4.1 variant call set (https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/), LD score resources https://
alkesgroup.broadinstitute.org/LDSCORE/), NCBI Virus for reference sequences (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/), PrimateAI-3D scores (https://
primateai3d.basespace.illumina.com/), GENCODE 39 definitions (https://www.gencodegenes.org/), and GTEx expression and splice quantitative trait associations
(https://gtexportal.org/home/). Full viral DNA load GWAS summary statistics are available from the GWAS Catalog under accessions GCST90809801 to
GCST90809829.
Research involving human participants, their data, or biological material
Policy information about studies with human participants or human data. See also policy information about sex, gender (identity/presentation),
and sexual orientation and race, ethnicity and racism.
Reporting on sex and gender For UK Biobank (recorded 222,094 males, 263,132 females), sex was acquired from NHS central registry at recruitment, but
in some cases updated by the participant. For All of Us (recorded 161,253 males, 252,074 females), sex was genetically
determined by copy number and presence of X and Y chromosomes. For SFARI SPARK (recorded 7284 males, 5235 females),
sex was self-reported. Sex was used as a covariate in most analyses (ex. human genetic associations with viral load), where no
values directly pertaining to sex are reported for these analyses. Values pertaining to sex were reported for analyses that
demonstrated higher viral load in men (Fig. 2a-d, EDF 3c-e).
Reporting on race, ethnicity, or UK Biobank, using the top 20 ancestry principal components, a subset of individuals that fell within a Euclidean distance
other socially relevant (centered at the mean values of each PC for individuals who self-identified as "white") capturing 99% of individuals who self-
groupings identified as "white" were used for genotype and phenotype associations. For All of Us, analyses were restricted to
individuals with previously released genetically-predicted European ancestry for genotype and phenotype associations. For
SPARK, using the top 10 ancestry principal components, a subset of individuals that fell within a Euclidean distance (centered
at the mean values of each PC for individuals who self-identified as "white") capturing 90% of individuals who self-identified
as "white" were used for genotype and phenotype associations. For all analyses, ancestry principal components were
included as covariates in genetic associations. For associations of viral DNA with ancestry, these genetically-predicted
ancestries were used as independent variables for association with viral DNA.
Population characteristics UK Biobank is a cohort of approximately 500,000 individuals across the United Kingdom between 40 and 69 years of age at
time of recruitment (Sudlow et al. 2015 PLOS Medicine). For viral DNA associations in the UK Biobank cohort, age, age
squared, sex, genotype array, assessment center, and top 20 genetic ancestry PCs were used as covariates. All of Us is a
cohort of 414,817 individuals with WGS available (at time of analysis) across the United States older than 18 years of age at
time of recruitment (The All of Us Research Program Investigators 2019 N Engl J Med). For viral DNA associations in the All of
Us cohort, age, age squared, sex, and the top 16 genetic ancestry principal components (from ancestry_preds.tsv) were used
as covariates. SFARI SPARK is a cohort of approximately 160,000 families with at least one child with autism spectrum
disorder, where 12,519 individuals (at time of analysis) have WGS from saliva available (SPARK Consortium 2018 Neuron).
Children range in age from 0-50 years of age (mean 9 years) and parents from 19-90 years of age (mean 41 years). For viral
DNA associations in the SPARK SFARI cohort, sequencing batch, age, age squared, square root of age, sex, percent of mapped
reads, and the top 10 genetic ancestry principal components were used as covariates.
Recruitment Individuals and biosamples were not obtained for this study and their recruitment is as described in prior publications (cited
in current work).
Ethics oversight Individuals and biosamples were not obtained for this study and local IRBs at each institution approved the collections and
patient-consent materials, as described in the earlier papers on these cohorts (cited in current work). Datasets were used as
approved for research plans as stated in applications to each, including UK Biobank Resource application #40709.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
3
nature
portfolio
|
reporting
summary
April
2023
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size For associations in the UK Biobank WGS data set, individuals were excluded based on the following criteria: removed for not having European
genetic ancestry; removed for not having available TOPMed-imputed genotypes (including for chromosome X); and removed for having
withdrawn, leaving 453,770 available individuals for genetic association analyses. For some associations using linear regression rather than
linear mixed models that would account for relatedness (ex. HLA local associations), additional samples were removed to drop one relative
within pairs of close relatives with kinship coefficient > 0.0884.
For associations in the All of Us cohort, 414,817 samples with available WGS were first separated into those where sample DNA was either
blood (n=365,918) or saliva-derived (n=48,899). Individuals were then excluded for not having European genetic ancestry, leaving 201,181
blood-derived samples and 33,164 saliva-derived samples. For analyses of HHV-6B viral load, individuals with endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B
were excluded, leaving 199,133 blood-derived samples and 32,826 saliva samples. For saliva-derived samples, some associations (such as
those associating quantity rather than presence of viral DNA) were then performed on the subset of samples with at least 1 viral DNA
sequence, leaving a subset of samples as noted in the text (ex. 16,282 samples for EBV).
For associations in the SFARI SPARK cohort, among 12,519 samples with available WGS data some samples were removed for not having
European genetic ancestry, leaving 9,209 individuals. For analyses of HHV-6B viral load, individuals with endogenous HHV-6A or HHV-6B were
excluded, leaving 9,081 individuals. Some associations associating quantity rather than presence of viral DNA were then performed on the
subset of samples with at least 1 viral DNA sequence, leaving a reduced sample number as noted in the text.
In all cases, no sample-size calculation was done to predetermine sample size and the maximum number of available samples were used. For
viral DNA genetic associations, we expected that although the phenotype was sparser with less dynamic range than previous work measuring
viral load by PCR (ex. HIV viral load), that the greatly increased sample size (2-3 orders of magnitude) would allow for observing expected
associations in the MHC region of the human genome. Previous work has also suggested EBV viral load to be heritable.
Data exclusions Established QC metrics were used to exclude some samples, genotypes, or sequencing data for analysis as described in previously published
studies (cited in the current work). In brief: For UK Biobank WGS, the sequencing of 914 participants failed due to either insufficient or poor-
quality DNA. For UK Biobank array genotypes used for imputation, ~3% of samples had insufficient DNA to use as input for genotyping and
968 samples with genotypes were excluded for high heterozygosity or >5% missing rate. For All of Us WGS, samples were excluded for low
quality or insufficient DNA for library production and 987 samples were at least eight median absolute deviations from median residual in at
least one type of variant metric (ex. number of SNPs, number of indels). For SPARK WGS, no samples were excluded by QC criteria. Samples
from individuals in UK Biobank, All of Us, and SFARI SPARK that requested to be withdrawn at the time of analysis were excluded.
Replication For each viral association observed in UK Biobank (blood) and SPARK (saliva), we were generally successful in replicating those tested in the
subset of All of Us samples with DNA derived from the same source (blood or saliva) such that each had a single attempt at replication. This
included associations with human genetics (besides one EBV-associated locus that had discordant direction of effect in blood samples from All
of Us relative to UK Biobank), smoking, age, sex, time of day, and month of the year. We did not attempt replication of binary ICD-10 code
phenotypes in All of Us.
Additionally, we attempted to verify all genetic associations to EBV and HHV-7 load in UK Biobank by generating additional phenotypes from
reads aligning to the left and right halves of each genome and evaluating whether associations to all virally-aligned reads replicated in these
phenotypes. All loci but 1 successfully replicated (the same locus which failed replication in All of Us), such that each association had a single
attempt at replication with this approach.
Randomization For UK Biobank, samples were collected in batches at different assessment centers at locations across the United Kingdom and these were
encoded as indicator covariates in phenotype-genotype associations. For All of Us, samples were collected in batches at different sequencing
centers, and these were encoded as indicator variables in phenotype-genotype associations. For SFARI SPARK, samples were collected in
different batches of sequencing cohorts (WGS1 through WGS5) and these were encoded as indicator covariates in phenotype-genotype
associations. No further randomization was done in each cohort as all samples were used for each analysis.
Blinding For data collection, blinding was not relevant as data was collected by other research groups (cited in the current work) and re-analyzed in
this work. For all computational analyses blinding was always done, as samples were listed with a randomized ID where association of
measured genotype with viral DNA phenotype was only done at the point of final statistical analysis.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
4
nature
portfolio
|
reporting
summary
April
2023
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology and archaeology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Plants
Plants
Seed stocks Report on the source of all seed stocks or other plant material used. If applicable, state the seed stock centre and catalogue number. If
plant specimens were collected from the field, describe the collection location, date and sampling procedures.
Novel plant genotypes Describe the methods by which all novel plant genotypes were produced. This includes those generated by transgenic approaches,
gene editing, chemical/radiation-based mutagenesis and hybridization. For transgenic lines, describe the transformation method, the
number of independent lines analyzed and the generation upon which experiments were performed. For gene-edited lines, describe
the editor used, the endogenous sequence targeted for editing, the targeting guide RNA sequence (if applicable) and how the editor
was applied.
Authentication Describe any authentication procedures for each seed stock used or novel genotype generated. Describe any experiments used to
assess the effect of a mutation and, where applicable, how potential secondary effects (e.g. second site T-DNA insertions, mosiacism,
off-target gene editing) were examined.