# 1-s2.0-S2950435X25000526-main

Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomedical Analysis
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/bioana/
The health protection potential of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae in
an aging society
Yuhan Zheng
a , 1
, Jun Li
d , 1
, Xiaosheng Chen
b
, Bo Ma
c ,
⁎
, Ke Chen
a ,
⁎
, Fei Yu
b ,
⁎
a
The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Department of Spine Surgery, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518020, China
b
Department of Spine Surgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518035, China
c
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China
d
Department of Vascular Surgery, Shenzhen Luohu Hospital Group Luohu People's Hospital, Guangdong 518000, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae(TFRD)
Degenerative musculoskeletal diseases(DMDs)
Osteoporosis (OP)
Osteoarthritis (OA)
Sarcopenia (SP)
ABSTRACT
With the global population aging, degenerative musculoskeletal diseases (DMDs) such as osteoporosis (OP),
osteoarthritis (OA), and sarcopenia (SP) have placed a substantial burden on society. Consequently, there is an
urgent demand for developing corresponding prevention and treatment strategies for these diseases. Rhizoma
Drynariae (RD) refers to the dried rhizome of Drynaria fortunei (Kunze) J.Sm. Endowed with abundant resources,
it exerts therapeutic effects in healing trauma and alleviating pain, tonifying the kidney to strengthen bones, as
well as dispelling pathogenic wind and eliminating macules. Consequently, it serves as a frequently employed
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) in the field of TCM orthopedics and traumatology. Recent phytochemical
studies have identified a variety of compounds in RD, including flavonoids, phenylpropanoids, triterpenoids,
phenolic acids, and steroids, among others. Among these, flavonoids are the primary bioactive components and
have attracted considerable research attention due to their extensive pharmacological activities. Relevant studies
have shown that flavonoids have potential in the clinical application of DMDs. This review systematically in -
tegrates and critically analyzes the latest research progress of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae (TFRD), in
the treatment of DMDs. It also provides a comprehensive overview of the current research status, aiming to
identify promising future research directions for TFRD.
1. Introduction
On a global scale, the intensification of population aging has led to
growing concerns about age - related diseases. It is documented that
aging is a common risk factor for degenerative musculoskeletal dis -
eases. DMDs are caused by structural and functional damage to the
musculoskeletal system, including OP, OA, and SP [1] . DMDs are pre -
valent among the elderly and are prone to lead to adverse outcomes,
such as falls, fractures, physical disabilities, and mortality [2] . The
Global Burden of Diseases(GBD), Injuries and Risk Factors Study 2021
shows that approximately 1.69 billion people suffer from MSK diseases
worldwide [3] . With the increase in life expectancy and the global
aging of the population, the prevalence of DMDs has surged and is
expected to continue to increase in the next 10 years, which will bring a
heavy burden to the economy and society [4,5] . At present, there are
limited drug options for DMDs in clinical practice. Analgesics are
commonly used drugs for OA, but symptomatic treatment cannot
prevent or slow down the progression of the disease. There is no mature
clinical evidence for the drug intervention of SP [6–8] . Consequently,
gaining an understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms underlying
these conditions and creating drugs tailored to them holds considerable
importance for healthcare practitioners.
Natural medicines are an important source of future drug develop -
ment. RD is the dried rhizome of Drynaria fortunei (Kunze) J.Sm. , which
is widely distributed in Southeast Asia and many provinces and cities in
China, ensuring an adequate supply of drug resources [9] . RD is a
commonly used medicinal material in the formula of Traditional Chi -
nese Medicine orthopedics and traumatology. It has the medicinal ef -
fects of tonifying the kidney and strengthening bones, promoting blood
circulation and relieving pain, and reconnecting tendons and bones.
The related active ingredients have various pharmacodynamic effects
such as promoting the formation of new osteoblasts, anti-osteoporosis,
and treating chondrodysplasia [10,11] . In this context, it is necessary to
further sort out the active ingredients and medicinal value of RD. TFRD
https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioana.2025.11.001
Received 16 July 2025; Received in revised form 9 October 2025; Accepted 10 November 2025
2950-435X/© 2025 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-
ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Peer review under the responsibility of Editorial Office of Biomedical Analysis
]]
]]
]]]]]]
⁎
Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: cnmabo@126.com (B. Ma), xiao.han79@163.com (K. Chen), yufei89@pku.edu.cn (F. Yu).
1
These authors contributed equally to this work.
are the main bioactive components of RD, which have attracted the
attention of researchers due to their extensive pharmacological activ -
ities. Therefore, this study was conducted to review the chemical
components of TFRD and their pharmacological effects and related
basic research in the treatment of DMDs. These findings may lay a
theoretical foundation for their further development and clinical
transformation ( Fig. 1 ).
This paper collected relevant literature using the online databases of
PubMed and CNKI. Comprehensive searches were conducted using
keywords such as "Drynariae Rhizoma", "total flavonoids of Rhizoma
Drynariae", "osteoporosis", "osteoarthritis", "Degenerative musculoske -
letal diseases", etc. Particular attention was paid to the relevant re -
search progress in the past five years. To ensure the scientific accuracy
of this study, the chemical information related to TFRD was carefully
cross-validated through the authoritative chemical information plat -
form "PubChem".
2. Basic information of Rhizoma Drynariae
According to the "Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China"
(2020 Edition), RD is the dried rhizome of Drynaria fortunei (Kunze)
J.Sm. , a plant of the Polypodiaceae family. It is usually flat and long
strip-shaped, often curved, and branched. RD tastes bitter, has a warm
nature, and belongs to the liver and kidney meridians. It has the effects
of treating injuries and relieving pain, tonifying the kidney and
strengthening the bones; and externally, it can dispel wind and remove
freckles. Modern chemical research has identified a variety of com -
pounds in RD, including TFRD, triterpenoids, phenylpropanoids, phe -
nolic acids, steroids, etc [12] . Among them, the wide range of phar -
macological activities exhibited by TFRD make it the main active
ingredient responsible for the therapeutic effect of RD, and it is con -
sidered a key factor influencing the pharmacological activity of RD [9] .
TFRD can be further divided into dihydroflavonoids, flavanols, flavo -
nols, and other types of flavonoids and related glycosides ( Table 1 )
[12–17] . These components can play anti-OP, anti-inflammatory, an -
tioxidant, and other effects [18,19] . Naringin in dihydroflavonoids is
the main active substance required to be detected for the identification
of RD as specified in the Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of
China [16] .
3. Role and mechanism of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae
in the management of osteoporosis
OP is a systemic skeletal disease. Due to the imbalance of bone re -
modeling, it can lead to bone mass loss, and then result in a decrease in
bone strength and an increased risk of fractures. The pathogenesis of OP
is complex and involves cellular senescence, estrogen deficiency, gut
microbiota dysbiosis, and bone immune imbalance [7] . As reported in a
meta-analysis of epidemiological trends in OP, the global prevalence of
OP is approximately 18.3 %, with a higher prevalence in females
(23.1 %) than in males (11.7 %) [20] . At present, the main prevention
and treatment methods for OP include: lifestyle adjustment, drug
therapy, physical therapy, etc. RD can play an anti - OP role by pro -
moting bone formation, inhibiting bone loss, and enhancing bone me -
chanical properties [21] . Compared with Western medicine treatment
plans that have significant adverse reactions, complex contra -
indications, and high costs for combined and sequential medication, RD
can not only effectively relieve symptoms and improve bone mineral
density, but also only cause mild adverse reactions such as nausea,
constipation, and dry mouth, which are easy to handle and do not affect
subsequent medication. At the same time, it has the advantages of re -
liable safety, no obvious contraindications, and low cost [22] . Among
them, TFRD has now been developed into a listed proprietary Chinese
medicine and is recommended for the prevention and treatment of OP
and related bone diseases [7,23] . In recent years, the experimental re -
search on TFRD in the treatment of OP has been increasing day by day,
providing an important basis for the development and clinical appli -
cation of TFRD.
Fig. 1. Graphical Abstract.
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
141
Table 1
The main ingredient of TFRD (The molecular structure is derived from the chemical information platform "PubChem".).
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
142
In basic research, TFRD has been proven to prevent and treat OP by
acting on multiple signaling pathways and cytokines ( Fig. 2 ). Jin et al.
evaluated the effects of TFRD on osteoporotic rats and osteocytes. They
found that these flavonoids increased the vitality of osteocyte-like cells
and mitigated OP without obvious hepatotoxicity or nephrotoxicity
[24] . Fang et al. confirmed that TFRD activated the BMP2/Smad sig -
naling pathway and maintained bone metabolism balance in diabetic
model rats by promoting bone formation and inhibiting bone resorp -
tion, thus improving diabetic osteoporosis (DOP) [25] . Su et al. corro -
borated that TFRD promoted the differentiation of bone marrow me -
senchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) to osteoblasts (up-regulation of
RUNX2 and BMP-2) and inhibited their differentiation to adipocytes
(down-regulation of PPAR-γ and C/EBPα) through the MAPK/HIF-1α
signaling pathway. These modifications contributed to improving bone
microstructure, enhancing bone density, and inhibiting fat accumula -
tion, thus highlighting the important therapeutic potential of TFRD in
primary OP. Moreover, the dose-dependent efficacy of TFRD has been
validated in some animal models [26] . Among the flavonoid extracts of
RD, Naringin is considered a promising bone health protection in -
gredient due to its prominent effect on inhibiting bone resorption and
the absence of obvious hepatotoxicity or nephrotoxicity [27] . Studies
have shown that Naringin in Dendrolimus can enhance the osteogenic
differentiation ability of metanephric mesenchymal cells (MMCs)
through the p38 signaling pathway [28] . Li et al. proved that Sophor -
aflavanone G in RD improved OP by targeting the MAPK/NF- κ B sig -
naling pathway, inhibiting osteoclast differentiation and maturation,
and reducing bone loss [29] .
It has been reported that the combined therapy based on TFRD is
more effective in promoting osteogenesis and inhibiting bone breakage
compared with the monotherapy of TFRD. For example, Jiang et al.
found that the combination of TFRD and metformin (Met) played an
anti-OP role in vitro by regulating the SOST/Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway and the OPG/RANKL/RANK axis, exhibiting a more significant
effect than TFRD alone [30] .TFRD can also bind to calcium carbonate to
increase bone mineral content and reduce bone loss by modulating the
Wnt3a/β-catenin pathway and reducing the production of reactive
oxygen species, thereby enhancing the anti-OP effect [31,32] . These
research results indicate that TFRD has great potential in the develop -
ment of combination therapies. However, the clinical safety and effi -
cacy of TFRD still need to be further verified.
Zhao et al. extracted Rhizoma Drynariae-derived nano-vesicles
(RDNVs) from fresh RD root juice, and they found that RDNVs pro -
moted the expression of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) and
runt-associated transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) in human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) by targeting and activating the es -
trogen receptor α (ERα) signaling pathway, thereby promoting the
osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs. An in-depth analysis revealed
that Naringin in RDNVs was a key active component for RDNVs to
target ERα to exert osteogenic effects [33] . Zhou et al. pointed out that
the bone protective actions of herbal medicine RD were mainly medi -
ated by flavonoid phytoestrogens via estrogen receptors, and at the
same time, RD has tissue-selective estrogenic activity. It demonstrates
the capacity to selectively function as an estrogen agonist in bone and
brain tissues to confer protective effects, while acting as an antagonist
in reproductive organs—thereby circumventing the reproductive-re -
lated adverse effects associated with conventional hormone replace -
ment therapy (HRT). In particular, when combined with tamoxifen, RD
has no significant drug conflict, demonstrating its great clinical appli -
cation potential in the treatment of postmenopausal OP and other re -
lated menopausal symptoms in females [34] .
Lin et al. proposed that RD was effective in the treatment of OP by
regulating gut microbiota and improving bone metabolism. These re -
sults provided a new perspective on the mediated treatment of OP by
RD. In addition, RD may regulate intestinal microbiota through
the CMP-legionaminate biosynthesis Ⅰ pathway to maintain bone
metabolism balance. Lactobacillus, Ruminococcaceae_UCG-007,
Peptococcaceae_unclassified, and Ruminiclostridium may be potential
therapeutic targets [35] . Li et al. further demonstrated that TFRD al -
leviated ovariectomy (OVX)-induced OP by changing the community
makeup and abundance of gut microbiota, as well as adjusting meta -
bolites and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Gut microbiota, particularly
Akkermansia muciniphila and its associated metabolites, might have a
key part in OP treatment based on TFRD, which needs to be further
verified in subsequent experiments [36] .
In terms of clinical research, a meta - analysis shows that TFRD, the
main active ingredient of RD, has an adjuvant therapeutic effect in im -
proving patients' symptoms and femoral bone mineral density. The adverse
reactions include constipation, dry mouth, nausea, and gastrointestinal
reactions. These reactions are alleviated after symptomatic treatment, and
there is no need to stop the drug, indicating good safety [37] .
Fig. 2. Role and mechanism of TFRD in the management of osteoporosis.
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
143
These findings have established a robust theoretical basis for the man -
agement of OP predicated on TFRD. In particular, the improvement of OP
by RD through the regulation of gut microbiota shows important research
value. At present, the basic research of scholars mainly focuses on popular
mechanisms. Research on mechanisms such as the IHH signaling pathway
and glutamate pathway is relatively scarce. Scholars can expand the
breadth of research beyond longitudinal studies of popular mechanisms,
search for new pathways and new factors that play a role, and open up new
horizons for the research on preventing and treating OP with TFRD. At
present, TFRD has been developed into Qianggu Capsule (Drug Approval
Number: Z20030007, manufactured by Qi-Huang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
Beijing, China) for the clinical treatment of osteoporosis. Although studies
have shown that TFRD has a certain effect in increasing bone mineral
density and can be used as an intervention measure in clinical practice, we
have not retrieved any research on the pharmacokinetics and bioavail -
ability of TFRD. In the future, well-designed, high-quality trials are still
needed to verify this. Traditional Chinese medicine has the characteristics
of multi - pathway and multi - target. However, the complexity of reg -
ulating multiple pathways simultaneously may also lead to unpredictable
off-target effects or side effects, which requires further exploration on our
part. In addition, the exploration of combining TFRD with other substances
may provide more theoretical support for the clinical application of tar -
geted treatment of OP. For example, nanotechnology can improve the ef -
ficiency of drug delivery, providing new strategies for the efficient and safe
prevention and/or treatment of OP. Most of the RD extracts included in the
research still belong to mixed components. In the future, it is necessary to
further extract precise and effective components and find the exact targets
for preventing and treating OP, which is crucial for the development of new
clinical drugs. The clinical application of TFRD in preventing and treating
OP is undoubtedly promising in an aging society. However, the mechan -
isms of occurrence and prevention and treatment methods of adverse re -
actions such as gastrointestinal reactions, dry mouth, and constipation still
need to be clarified. More high - quality clinical studies are still needed to
narrow the gap between the traditional use of TFRD and its evidence -
based modern medical use.
4. Role and mechanism of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae
in the management of osteoarthritis
As a serious chronic disease characterized by cellular stress and
extracellular matrix degradation, OA is caused by joint dysfunction
resulting from the abnormal metabolism of joint tissue. It is also one of
the main diseases that may lead to disability and premature loss of work
[38] . The pathogenesis of OA involves many complex factors, such as
genetics, biomechanics, metabolic changes of articular cartilage, and
inflammatory response [39] . According to some studies based on GBD
data, the economic burden of OA patients worldwide is also gradually
increasing with the aging of global populations, and its incidence and
prevalence are still on the rise [40] . The treatment of OA is primarily
structured around basic treatment, pharmacotherapy, and surgical
treatment. Among various therapeutic agents, oral Non-Steroidal Anti-
Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) have become the most widely used first-
line drugs in clinical practice due to their ability to effectively inhibit
inflammatory responses and alleviate pain. However, NSAIDs exhibit a
ceiling effect—excessive use does not enhance therapeutic efficacy but
may increase the risk of adverse drug reactions and toxic effects [41] .
Therefore, the development of new therapeutic regimens for OA has
important clinical and social significance. At present, the emerging
pharmacological strategies for OA mainly focus on inhibiting cartilage
decomposition, promoting cartilage repair, reducing bone resorption of
the subchondral bone, and intensifying anti-inflammation effects [42] .
RD, a traditional Chinese medicinal agent used in treating bone injuries,
has been gaining increasing attention in the management of OA.
Some clinical studies have shown that TFRD is beneficial for the treat -
ment of OA. Zhou et al. found that after 12 weeks of oral administration of
TFRD, the symptoms of osteoarthritis were effectively controlled, the joint
mobility function was significantly improved, and the decrease in the levels
of IL-1β and PGE in the serum might be one of the action pathways of the
drug [43] . Wang et al. innovatively proposed the treatment of knee os -
teoarthritis with floating needles combined with Qianggu Capsules. By
leveraging the synergistic effect of biological factors and bioelectric signals,
they adjusted the unbalanced tendon and bone state of the knee joint,
achieving a good therapeutic effect [44] . Zhang used TFRD combined with
glucosamine sulfate to treat OA and found that it significantly improved the
curative effect compared with using them alone, and it has high safety [45] .
However, the specific mechanism by which TFRD affects OA has not been
elucidated and requires further exploration by us to provide more theore -
tical basis for the clinical application of TFRD.
In terms of basic research, certain achievements have been made at
present ( Fig. 3 ). Chen et al. reported that TFRD effectively inhibited the
activation of the NF- κ B and PI3K/AKT pathways, down-regulated the
expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in articular chon -
drocytes in OA rat models, and up-regulated the expression of Tissue
Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-4 (TIMP-4). These modifications restored
Fig. 3. Mechanism of TFRD reducing articular cartilage damage in OA models.
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
144
the balance between MMPs and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases
(TIMPs) in OA models, thereby significantly reducing articular cartilage
damage in OA models. Besides, they demonstrated that TFRD down -
regulated COX-2 expression in chondrocytes by activating the AMPK
signaling pathway and suppressing the NF-κB pathway. This, in turn,
inhibited the downstream arachidonic acid metabolic pathway, which
was identified as the key mechanism underlying TFRD's role in treating
OA [46,47] . Some studies have validated that Naringin, an important
active component of TFRD, can protect IL-1β-induced degenerative
chondrocytes and promote the proliferation of chondrocytes in rabbits.
The mechanism may be related to the inhibition of the caveolin-
p38MAPK signaling pathway [48] . Ye et al. combined oral Naringin with
implantation of acellular dermal matrix, and they found that this com -
bination could repair cartilage defects in the rabbit knee with better ef -
fects than oral Naringin alone. Through further analysis, they found that
this repair effect was related to the activation of the TGF-β/ALK5/
Smad2/3 signaling pathway induced by Naringin, which promoted the
high expression of TGF-β 2, TGF-β 3, and Sox-9 at the cartilage defect.
These changes promoted the proliferation, differentiation, development,
and extracellular matrix synthesis of chondrocytes, ultimately improving
articular cartilage quality and joint structure [49] . This finding provides
a novel insight for combining drugs and materials for the treatment of
OA, but more evidence is needed to support its clinical application. Pan
et al. first found that naringenin (NAR) reduced iron overload-induced
osteoarthritis (IOOA). For one thing, NAR eliminates accumulated re -
active oxygen species (ROS) by virtue of its antioxidant activity; for
another, it strengthens the antioxidant capacity of chondrocytes via the
NRF2-HO-1 signaling pathway. The experimental results also indicated
that NAR can reduce iron accumulation, which may contribute to the
development of new drugs for the treatment of IOOA. However, its acting
mechanism still needs to be further studied [50] . A study based on net -
work pharmacology and experimental verification indicates that luteolin
is the most crucial component in the treatment of OA by RD. Its me -
chanism of action is closely related to its inhibitory effect on the ex -
pression of interleukin - 6 (IL - 6) through the PI3K/AKT/NF - κB
pathway [51] . In summary, TFRD can improve OA by regulating in -
flammation, promoting cartilage repair, and resisting oxidative stress.
In future research, researchers can focus on the synergistic me -
chanism of different components of TFRD in the OA microenvironment
and clarify the cross - regulatory network of the AMPK/NF - κB, NF - κB
and PI3K/AKT pathways. At the same time, regulating the complexity
of numerous pathways may also lead to unpredictable off - target effects
or side effects, which need our attention. Focusing on luteolin in TFRD
is undoubtedly more valuable. The treatment of OA by luteolin through
the PI3K/AKT/NF - κB pathway has been verified in in vitro experi -
ments, and these results should be further verified in in vivo experi -
ments. The breadth of research can also be expanded to find new action
pathways of luteolin, providing a new basis for its clinical application.
Besides, focusing on the gut microbiota could represent a promising
therapeutic approach for managing OA [52] . Currently, whether TFRD
can regulate the OA-related intestinal flora has not been clarified suf -
ficiently. In the future, metagenomic and metabolomic analyses can be
used to further reveal the acting mechanism of TFRD, thus enhancing
the comprehension of OA pathogenesis and providing a new direction
for RD-based drug development. It has been demonstrated that joint
traction, an emerging therapy for OA, can repair the joint by restoring
the normal joint environment. Hence, it may be feasible to establish
therapeutic regimens based on the combination of TFRD components
and joint traction, thus providing more effective innovative strategies
for delaying the progression of OA and improving joint function [53] .
5. Role and mechanism of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae
in the management of sarcopenia
The pathogenesis of SP lies in the cumulative adverse muscular
changes over an individual's lifetime. This disease is characterized by
low muscle strength, reduced muscle mass and/or quality, and dimin -
ished physical function. SP is particularly prevalent in the elderly po -
pulation [54] . Several molecular mechanisms have been reported as
contributors to SP, including dysregulation of hormonal functions such
as IGF-1 and insulin, impaired differentiation and proliferative poten -
tial of muscle satellite cells, and dysfunction in inflammatory pathways
[55] . According to different diagnostic criteria, the overall prevalence
of SP ranges from 10 % to 27 % worldwide. More specifically, the
prevalence of severe geriatric SP is about 2–9 %; the prevalence of SP
among individuals aged <  60 years is 8–36 %, while that among in -
dividuals aged ≥ 60 years is 10–27 % [56] . Patients with SP, regardless
of diagnostic criteria, have a low quality of life and a significantly in -
creased risk of falls, fractures, and death [57] . At present, SP is mainly
treated by resistance strength training and high-quality protein sup -
plementation, and there is no targeted drug for this disease [58] . Al -
though the effectiveness of resistance training and nutritional support
has been recognized, these therapies are not feasible for patients with
SP under some circumstances, especially for the frail and sickly elderly
[59] . Therefore, it is necessary to develop new drugs to mitigate SP,
enhancing patients' quality of life, and relieve the burden on the med -
ical system and society [60] .
Yin and co-workers demonstrated a positive association between
blood lipid ratios and SP in middle-aged adults, implying a potential
connection between blood lipids and SP where inflammatory bio -
markers exert a substantial mediating effect [61] . Some studies have
demonstrated that the hypertrophy, proliferation, and activation of
adipocytes in obesity can lead to insulin resistance and lipid toxicity in
skeletal muscle. Insulin resistance can interfere with the effective use of
glucose by muscles to accelerate the breakdown of protein and muscle,
thereby impairing muscle function and promoting the occurrence and
development of SP [62,63] . Lu et al. found that RD increased the bone
mineral density (BMD) in OP patients ，it also improved blood lipid
levels in patients by modulating Notch1-NLRP3 inflammasomes [64] .
Bonnet et al. proposed that the muscle strength and insulin sensitivity
of humans were improved by inhibiting RANKL, exhibiting the poten -
tial for SP treatment [65] . Furthermore, some experiments have shown
that TFRD can significantly reduce the RANKL/OPG ratio [66] . These
studies demonstrate that TFRD has the potential to ameliorate SP by
alleviating obesity. However, it is still necessary to further investigate
the underlying mechanism involving the "blood lipid-obesity-SP" re -
lationship.
Some inflammatory cytokines are linearly associated with muscle
health [67] , suggesting an external link between inflammation and SP.
As the first and most studied "myokine", IL-6 is produced in large
quantities by skeletal muscle during exercise [68] . On the one hand, IL-
6 is an important cytokine for skeletal muscle to exert motor function
and improve exercise endurance [69] ; on the other hand, chronic in -
flammation is an important determinant of SP, and elevated IL-6 and
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) can have adverse effects on the phy -
siological function of muscle [59] . Therefore, reducing the harmful
impacts of pro-inflammatory cytokines could represent a therapeutic
approach for SP. Zhao et al. reported for the first time that TFRD exerts
anti-inflammatory effects through suppression of MAPK signaling
pathway activation triggered by proinflammatory cytokines, including
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and TNF-α [70] . The above findings indicate
that, by virtue of its anti-inflammatory properties, TFRD could serve as
a preventive and/or therapeutic agent for SP, and future studies can
focus on the anti-inflammatory mechanism of TFRD and the main
components acting on muscle cells or tissues.
The decreased estrogen level during menopause is an important
cause of decreased muscle mass and muscle strength [71] . Dam et al.
observed that percutaneous estrogen therapy enhanced muscle mass
and grip strength in early menopausal women following 12 weeks of
resistance training [72] . Through gene knockout methods, Seko et al.
confirmed that the estrogen-ERβ pathway constitutes a sex-specific
regulatory mechanism, exerting a significant role in muscle growth and
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
145
regeneration in female mice [73] . Some studies have shown that fla -
vonoid can exert tissue-selective estrogenic effects in ovariectomized
rats [34] . At present, there are relatively few studies on the improve -
ment of SP by TFRD through estrogen replacement. Despite these
controversies, targeting estrogen receptors by TFRD-related chemical
components as pharmaceutical HRT may also be a new strategy for the
treatment of postmenopausal SP [74] .
Overall, obesity, changes in estrogen levels, and inflammation are
closely related to SP, and TFRD has the potential to prevent and/or
treat SP by improving blood lipid levels and exerting estrogen-like ef -
fects and anti-inflammatory effects ( Fig. 4 ). However, there are rela -
tively few studies on the treatment of SP with TFRD, and hence more
basic and clinical studies are needed to provide more direct evidence. In
the future, it will be necessary to further elucidate the specific mole -
cular mechanism by which TFRD alleviates SP, particularly the "blood
lipid-obesity-SP" association. Furthermore, it is also required to in -
vestigate the pathways related to blood lipid regulation by TFRD in the
treatment of SP and the mechanisms by which THE active components
of TFRD regulate inflammatory signaling pathways to exert anti-in -
flammatory effects. The isolation and characterization of TFRD's active
components that alleviate SP could facilitate the development of tar -
geted pharmaceuticals.
6. Summary and outlook
As a traditional medicine commonly used in the Department of
Orthopedics and Traumatology of Traditional Chinese Medicine, RD
shows the synergistic therapeutic potential involving multiple compo -
nents and multiple targets in the treatment of DMDs. However, as a
natural product, its chemical characteristics, including the concentra -
tion of TFRD, may vary greatly depending on growth conditions, har -
vest time, and processing methods. There is still a lack of discussion on
standardization: how to ensure consistent, effective, and safe products.
This is something that requires our attention on the way for it to de -
velop into a modern medicine. For the development of future drugs, the
selection of the extraction scheme for the active ingredients of RD and
the setting of relevant parameters are closely related to the quality and
efficiency of compound extraction. Exploring more efficient extraction
methods is also the direction we need to strive for. Its main active
components, total flavonoids and flavonoids such as naringin, play an
important role in alleviating OP, OA, and SP by regulating various
signaling pathways. However, the safety and effectiveness of TFRD in
the prevention and/or treatment of DMDs still need to be further
evaluated. Besides, the specific mechanism of TFRD in the management
of these diseases has not been fully clarified due to some pending
problems. For example, it is also necessary to identify whether TFRD
can play an osteogenic role by activating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway while accelerating the progression of malignant tumors [75] .
In terms of clinical application research, there is no unified conclusion
on the safe dose that can achieve the best efficacy of TFRD. Clarifying
this difficult problem is of great significance for long - term and high -
dose clinical applications.
Against the backdrop of global population aging, TFRD provide a
new possibility for the treatment of DMDs. With the continuous im -
provement of the Quality Standard System of Natural Materials and the
deep integration of modern science and technology, the immense re -
servoir of natural substances is expected to improve the health and
well-being of all mankind.
Author contributions
Yuhan Zheng and Jun Li analyzed the data and wrote the manu -
script. Fei Yu, Ke Chen, Ma Bo, Chen Xiaosheng revised the manuscript.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yuhan Zheng: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Formal analysis, Data curation. Jun Li: Writing – original draft, Data
curation. Chen Xiaosheng: Writing – review & editing. Ma Bo: Writing
– review & editing. Ke Chen: Writing – review & editing. Fei Yu:
Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Funding acquisition.
Statement of ethics
None.
Funding
This research was supported by grants from Sanming Project of
Medicine in Shenzhen (No. SZSM202211003) ， Shenzhen Key Medical
Discipline Construction Fund （ No. SZXK022 ）， Guangdong Province
Medical Science and Technology Research Foundation Project (No.
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the potential mechanism of TFRD in preventing and/or treating sarcopenia.
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
146
B2025518), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation
(No. 2022A1515220111), and Shenzhen Second People’s Hospital
Clinical Research Fund of Shenzhen High-level Hospital Construction
Project (No. 20253357002).
Data availability
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were gen -
erated or analyzed during the current study.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ -
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all research staff for their thorough and
helpful suggestions during the revision of the article.
References
[1] Z.Q. Wen, J. Lin, W.Q. Xie, et al., Insights into the underlying pathogenesis and
therapeutic potential of endoplasmic reticulum stress in degenerative musculoske -
letal diseases, Mil. Med. Res. 10 (2023) 54 , https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-023-
00485-5 .
[2] M. Nunes-Pinto, R.G. Bandeira De Mello, M.N. Pinto, et al., Sarcopenia and the
biological determinants of aging: a narrative review from a geroscience perspective,
Ageing Res. Rev. 103 (2025) 102587, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102587 .
[3] A.J. Ferrari, D.F. Santomauro, A. Aali, et al., Global incidence, prevalence, years
lived with disability (YLDs), disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs), and healthy life
expectancy (HALE) for 371 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories and
811 subnational locations, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden
of Disease Study 2021, Lancet 403 (10440) (2024) 2133–2161 , https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0140-6736(24)00757-8 .
[4] P. Yin, Y. Jiang, X. Fang, et al., Cell-based therapies for degenerative musculoske -
letal diseases, Adv. Sci. 10 (21) (2023) 2207050, https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.
202207050 .
[5] J.J. Yang, S.Q. He, B. Huang, et al., A bibliometric and visualized analysis of extra -
cellular vesicles in degenerative musculoskeletal diseases (from 2006 to 2024), Front.
Pharmacol. 16 (2025) 1550208, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2025.1550208 .
[6] Yijiao Lou, Ansu Wang, Yan Ma, et al., Interpretation of consensus for sarcopenia
and research status quo, Chin. Gen. Pract. Nurs. 19 (30) (2021) 4196–4200.
[7] Chinese Society Of Osteoporosis And Bone Mineral Research, Zhenlin Zhang,
Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of primary osteoporosis(2022), Chin.
Gen. Pract. 26 (14) (2023) 1671–1691.
[8] Bo Wang, Nansheng Yu, Consensus of four-stepladder program of knee osteoar -
thritis (2018), Chin. J. Jt. Surg. (Electron. Ed. ) 13 (1) (2019) 124–130.
[9] G. Jingying, L. Yonghong, F. Huawei, et al., A comprehensive review of Drynariae
rhizoma: botany, traditional applications, and active flavonoid components, J.
Pharm. Pharmacol. (2025) rgaf050, https://doi.org/10.1093/jpp/rgaf050 .
[10] Qiao Deng Qiang, Li Xiaowan, Zhongfeng, et al., Research progress of Gusuibu
(Drynariae Rhizoma)and its active ingredients in the treatment of skeletal system
diseases, J. Liaoning Univ. Tradit. 24 (7) (2022) 1–5 , https://doi.org/10.13194/j.
issn.1673-842x.2022.07.001 .
[11] Yang Xiang Congcong, Yu Meng, Qiaoling, et al., Research progress on Drynariae
Rhizoma, South China Agric. 18 (15) (2024) 90–95 , https://doi.org/10.19415/j.
cnki.1673-890x.2024.15.019 .
[12] Zhiyan Zhang, Ziyu Pu, Mingtao Zhang, et al., Research progress on chemical
constituents and pharmacological effects of chinese medicine Drynaria Fortunei, J.
Nanjing Univ. Tradit. (8) (2025) 1114–1126 , https://doi.org/10.14148/j.issn.1672-
0482.2025.1114 .
[13] Y.Hong Liang, M. Ye, W.Zhi Yang, et al., Flavan-3-ols from the rhizomes of Drynaria
fortunei, Phytochemistry 72 (14) (2011) 1876–1882 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
phytochem.2011.05.011 .
[14] Zhou Qun, Zeng Xian, Dan Huang, et al., Research progress on the chemical com -
position and biological activity of Drynariae Rhizoma, Mod. Tradit. Chin. Med.
Mater. Med. World Sci. Technol. 23 (8) (2021) 2727–2741.
[15] Shun-Qing Chen, Wei Liang, Xue-Mei Zhang, et al., Research progress on chemical
compositions and pharmacological action of Drynariae Rhizoma, China J. Chin.
Mater. Med. 46 (11) (2021) 2737–2745 , https://doi.org/10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.
20210222.602 .
[16] Yu Xiang, Yu Xiang, Zhang Peng, et al., Research progress on the clinical efficacy
mechanism of total flavonoids of rhizoma drynariae in the treatment of osteoporotic
fracture, Chin. J. Osteoporos. 31 (1) (2025) 149–156.
[17] G. Jingying, L. Yonghong, F. Huawei, et al., A comprehensive review of Drynariae
rhizoma: botany, traditional applications, and active flavonoid components, J.
Pharm. Pharmacol. (2025) rgaf050 , https://doi.org/10.1093/jpp/rgaf050 .
[18] Zhou Qun, Zeng Xian, Dan Huang, et al., Research progress on the chemical com -
position and biological activity of Drynariae Rhizoma, Mod. Tradit. Chin. Med.
Mater. Med. World Sci. Technol. 23 (8) (2021) 2727–2741.
[19] Shun-Qing Chen, Wei Liang, Xue-Mei Zhang, et al., Research progress on chemical
compositions and pharmacological action of Drynariae Rhizoma, China J. Chin.
Mater. Med. 46 (11) (2021) 2737–2745 , https://doi.org/10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.
20210222.602 .
[20] N. Salari, H. Ghasemi, L. Mohammadi, et al., The global prevalence of osteoporosis
in the world: a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Orthop.
Surg. Res. 16 (2021) 609 , https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-021-02772-0 .
[21] Han Feiyu, Cao Yujing, Lin Zihan, et al., Action mechanism and clinical research
progress of Gusuibu (Rhizoma Drynariae) fighting against osteoporosis, Acta Chin.
Med. 40 (4) (2025) 812–819 , https://doi.org/10.16368/j.issn.1674-8999.2025.04.
131 .
[22] Liu Bo, Ding Longlong, Chen Zhijian, et al., The mechanism of rhizoma drynariae
and its active components in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, Chin. J.
Osteoporos. 30 (10) (2024) 1540–1547.
[23] Y. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Shen, et al., Total flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae
(Gusuibu) for treating osteoporotic fractures: implication in clinical practice, Drug
Des. Dev. Ther. 11 (2017) 1881–1890 , https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S139804 .
[24] H. Jin, N. Jiang, W. Xu, et al., Effect of flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae on
osteoporosis rats and osteocytes, Biomed. Pharmacother. 153 (2022) 113379,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113379 .
[25] X.H. Fang, G.E. Zhou, N. Lin, Total flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae (Gusuibu)
alleviates diabetic osteoporosis by activating BMP2/smad signaling pathway,
Comb. Chem. High. Throughput Screen. 26 (13) (2023) 2401–2409 , https://doi.
org/10.2174/1386207326666230223165730 .
[26] H. Su, L. Liu, Z. Yan, et al., Therapeutic potential of total flavonoids of Rhizoma
Drynariae: inhibiting adipogenesis and promoting osteogenesis via MAPK/HIF-1α
pathway in primary osteoporosis, J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 20 (2025) 260 , https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13018-025-05665-8 .
[27] H. Jin, N. Jiang, W. Xu, et al., Effect of flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae on os -
teoporosis rats and osteocytes, Biomed. Pharmacother. 153 (2022) 113379, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113379 .
[28] P.Cheng Ji, Y.Sheng Xie, W.Kai Guo, et al., p38 signaling mediates naringin-induced
osteogenic differentiation of porcine metanephric mesenchymal cells, Chin. J.
Integr. Med. 30 (9) (2024) 818–825 , https://doi.org/10.1007/s11655-024-3761-1 .
[29] X. Li, W. Deng, K. Tang, et al., Sophoraflavanone G inhibits RANKL-induced os -
teoclastogenesis via MAPK/NF-κB signaling pathway, Mol. Biotechnol. 67 (5)
(2025) 2085–2097 , https://doi.org/10.1007/s12033-024-01185-8 .
[30] N. Jiang, H. Jin, K. Yang, et al., The mechanism of metformin combined with total
flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae on ovariectomy-induced osteoporotic rats, Biomed.
Pharmacother. 165 (2023) 115181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.
115181 .
[31] P. Mu, Y. Hu, X. Ma, et al., Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae combined with
calcium attenuate osteoporosis by reducing reactive oxygen species generation,
Exp. Ther. Med. 21 (6) (2021) 618 , https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.10050 .
[32] Y. Hu, P. Mu, X. Ma, et al., Rhizoma drynariae total flavonoids combined with
calcium carbonate ameliorates bone loss in experimentally induced Osteoporosis in
rats via the regulation of Wnt3a/β-catenin pathway, J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 16 (2021)
702 , https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-021-02842-3 .
[33] Q. Zhao, J. Feng, F. Liu, et al., Rhizoma Drynariae-derived nanovesicles reverse
osteoporosis by potentiating osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells via targeting ERα signaling, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 14 (5)
(2024) 2210–2227 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2024.02.005 .
[34] L. Zhou, K.Y. Wong, C.C.W. Poon, et al., Water extract of Rhizoma Drynaria se -
lectively exerts estrogenic activities in ovariectomized rats and estrogen receptor-
positive cells, Front. Endocrinol. 13 (2022) 817146, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fendo.2022.817146 .
[35] Q. Lin, X. Ouyang, Q. Pan, et al., Extracts of Drynariae Rhizoma promote bone
formation in OVX Rats through modulating the gut microbiota, Planta Med. 91 (3)
(2025) 127–141 , https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2462-4844 .
[36] Q. Li, X. Wu, X. Niu, et al., Integrated metagenomic and metabolomic analyses of
the effects of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae on reducing ovariectomized-
induced osteoporosis by regulating gut microbiota and related metabolites, PLOS
ONE 20 (2) (2025) e0317832, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0317832 .
[37] Qingying Wang, Yili Zhang, Yanming Xie, Meta analysis of total flavonoids from
Rhizoma Drynariae (Gusuibu) in treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Chin.
J. Osteoporos. 25 (04) (2019) 465–471 , https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1006-7108.
2019.04.008 .
[38] S. Tang, C. Zhang, W.M. Oo, et al., Osteoarthritis, Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 11 (1) (2025)
10 , https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-025-00594-6 .
[39] R.F. Loeser, J.A. Collins, B.O. Diekman, Ageing and the pathogenesis of osteoar -
thritis, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 12 (7) (2016) 412–420 , https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrrheum.2016.65 .
[40] F. Cao, Z. Xu, X.X. Li, et al., Trends and cross-country inequalities in the global
burden of osteoarthritis, 1990–2019: a population-based study, Ageing Res. Rev. 99
(2024) 102382, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102382 .
[41] Yu. Nansheng Wang Bo, Consensus of four-stepladder program of knee osteoar -
thritis (2018), Chin. J. Jt. Surg. (Electron. Ed. ) 13 (1) (2019) 124–130.
[42] A. Latourte, M. Kloppenburg, P. Richette, Emerging pharmaceutical therapies for
osteoarthritis, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 16 (12) (2020) 673–688 , https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41584-020-00518-6 .
[43] Chen Zhou Rongkui, Li. He Changhong, Clinical observation of oral osteopractic
total flavonoids in the patients with knee osteoarthritis, China Med. Her. 8 (2)
(2011) 2 , https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1673-7210.2011.02.036 .
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
147
[44] Yuehui Wang, Hui Cheng, Yu Bai, A clinical study on treating 80 cases of knee
osteoarthritis by floating acupuncture plus the Qianggu capsule, Clin. J. Chin. Med.
8 (21) (2016) 2 , https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1674-7860.2016.21.050 .
[45] Jinhu ZhanG, Effects of total flavonoids of rhizome drynariae combined with glu -
cosamine sulfate on symptoms and bone metabolism and inflammatory factors in
patients with knee osteoarthritis, Chin. J. Osteoporos. 24 (7) (2018) 4 , https://doi.
org/10.3969/j.issn.1006-7108.2018.07.008 .
[46] G.Y. Chen, J.Q. Chen, X.Y. Liu, et al., Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae restore
the MMP/TIMP balance in models of osteoarthritis by inhibiting the activation of
the NF-κB and PI3K/AKT pathways, Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. eCAM
2021 (2021) 6634837, https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6634837 .
[47] G.Y. Chen, X.Y. Liu, X.E. Yan, et al., Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae treat
osteoarthritis by inhibiting arachidonic acid metabolites through AMPK/NFκB
pathway, J. Inflamm. Res. 16 (2023) 4123–4140 , https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.
S418345 .
[48] You-Xin Su, Hu Yan, Bao-Jun Chen, Effect of naringin of Drynaria Rhizome, a
Chinese Medical Component of Zhuanggu Jianxi Recipe Containing Serum on
Caveolin-p38MAPK signal pathway in IL-1β induced rabbit degenerated chon -
drocytes, Chin. J. Integr. Tradit. West. Med. (2014) DOI:CNKI:SUN:ZZXJ.0.2014-
12-024..
[49] C. Ye, J. Chen, Y. Qu, et al., Naringin in the repair of knee cartilage injury via the
TGF-β/ALK5/Smad2/3 signal transduction pathway combined with an acellular
dermal matrix, J. Orthop. Transl. 32 (2022) 1–11 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jot.
2021.06.004 .
[50] Z. Pan, Q. He, J. Zeng, et al., Naringenin protects against iron overload-induced
osteoarthritis by suppressing oxidative stress, Phytomedicine 105 (2022) 154330,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2022.154330 .
[51] Chen G. Yao, Liu X. Yu, Chen J. Qi, et al., Prediction of Rhizoma Drynariae targets
in the treatment of osteoarthritis based on network pharmacology and experimental
verification, Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. eCAM 2021 (2021) 5233462,
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5233462 .
[52] C.G. Boer, D. Radjabzadeh, C. Medina-Gomez, et al., Intestinal microbiome com -
position and its relation to joint pain and inflammation, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019)
4881 , https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12873-4 .
[53] M.P. Jansen, S.C. Mastbergen, Joint distraction for osteoarthritis: clinical evidence
and molecular mechanisms, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 18 (1) (2022) 35–46 , https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41584-021-00695-y .
[54] A.J. Cruz-Jentoft, G. Bahat, J. Bauer, et al., Sarcopenia: revised European consensus
on definition and diagnosis, Age Ageing 48 (1) (2019) 16–31 , https://doi.org/10.
1093/ageing/afy169 .
[55] P. Wiedmer, T. Jung, J.P. Castro, et al., Sarcopenia – Molecular mechanisms and
open questions, Ageing Res. Rev. 65 (2021) 101200, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.
2020.101200 .
[56] F. Petermann-Rocha, V. Balntzi, S.R. Gray, et al., Global prevalence of sarcopenia
and severe sarcopenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Cachex..
Sarcopenia Muscle 13 (1) (2022) 86–99 , https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.12783 .
[57] J. Xu, C.S. Wan, K. Ktoris, et al., Sarcopenia is associated with mortality in adults: a
systematic review and meta-analysis, Gerontology 68 (4) (2022) 361–376 , https://
doi.org/10.1159/000517099 .
[58] E. Dent, J.E. Morley, A.J. Cruz-Jentoft, et al., International clinical practice
guidelines for sarcopenia (ICFSR): screening, diagnosis and management, J. Nutr.
Health Aging 22 (10) (2018) 1148–1161 , https://doi.org/10.1007/s12603-018-
1139-9 .
[59] Y. Rolland, C. Dray, B. Vellas, et al., Current and investigational medications for the
treatment of sarcopenia, Metabolism 149 (2023) 155597, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.metabol.2023.155597 .
[60] L. Larsson, H. Degens, M. Li, et al., Sarcopenia: aging-related loss of muscle mass
and function, Physiol. Rev. 99 (1) (2019) 427–511 , https://doi.org/10.1152/
physrev.00061.2017 .
[61] X. Yin, H. Song, H. Chen, et al., Association between lipid ratios and sarcopenia and
the mediating roles of inflammatory biomarkers in a cross-sectional study from
NHANES 2011–2018, Sci. Rep. 15 (1) (2025) 6617 , https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-025-90131-y .
[62] A. Kalinkovich, G. Livshits, Sarcopenic obesity or obese sarcopenia: a cross talk
between age-associated adipose tissue and skeletal muscle inflammation as a main
mechanism of the pathogenesis, Ageing Res. Rev. 35 (2017) 200–221 , https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.arr.2016.09.008 .
[63] A. Beilerli, V. Kudriashov, A. Sufianov, et al., Regulation and mechanism of action
of miRNAs on insulin resistance in skeletal muscles, Noncoding RNA Res. 8 (2)
(2023) 218–223 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncrna.2023.02.005 .
[64] L. Lu, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, et al., Drynaria fortunei improves lipid profiles of elderly
patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis via regulation of Notch1-NLRP3 inflamma -
some-mediated inflammation, Gynecol. Endocrinol. Off. J. Int. Soc. Gynecol. Endocrinol.
38 (2) (2022) 176–180 , https://doi.org/10.1080/09513590.2021.2015760 .
[65] N. Bonnet, L. Bourgoin, E. Biver, et al., RANKL inhibition improves muscle strength
and insulin sensitivity and restores bone mass, J. Clin. Investig. 129 (8) (2019)
3214–3223 , https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI125915 .
[66] N. Jiang, H. Jin, K. Yang, et al., The mechanism of metformin combined with total
flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae on ovariectomy-induced osteoporotic rats, Biomed.
Pharmacother. 165 (2023) 115181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.115181 .
[67] J. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, et al., The association between eight complete blood
count-derived inflammatory markers and muscle health, Front. Nutr. 12 (2025)
1498757, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2025.1498757 .
[68] B.K. Pedersen, M.A. Febbraio, Muscle as an endocrine organ: focus on muscle-de -
rived interleukin-6, Physiol. Rev. 88 (4) (2008) 1379–1406 , https://doi.org/10.
1152/physrev.90100.2007 .
[69] Fäldt J, I. Wernstedt, S.M. Fitzgerald, et al., Reduced exercise endurance in inter -
leukin-6-deficient mice, Endocrinology 145 (6) (2004) 2680–2686 , https://doi.org/
10.1210/en.2003-1319 .
[70] K. Zhao, M. Chen, T. Liu, et al., Rhizoma drynariae total flavonoids inhibit the
inflammatory response and matrix degeneration via MAPK pathway in a rat de -
generative cervical intervertebral disc model], Biomed. Pharmacother. =
Biomedecine Pharmacother. 138 (2021) 111466, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopha.2021.111466 .
[71] Menopause and sarcopenia: a potential role for sex hormones, Maturitas 68 (4)
(2011) 331–336 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.01.014 .
[72] T.V. Dam, L.B. Dalgaard, S. Ringgaard, et al., Transdermal estrogen therapy im -
proves gains in skeletal muscle mass after 12 weeks of resistance training in early
postmenopausal women, Front. Physiol. 11 (2020) 596130, https://doi.org/10.
3389/fphys.2020.596130 .
[73] D. Seko, R. Fujita, Y. Kitajima, et al., Estrogen receptor β controls muscle growth
and regeneration in young female mice, Stem Cell Rep. 15 (3) (2020) 577–586 ,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.07.017 .
[74] T. Mitoma, J. Maki, H. Ooba, et al., Protocol for a randomised, placebo-controlled,
double-blinded clinical trial on the effect of oestrogen replacement on physical
performance to muscle resistance exercise for older women with osteoarthritis of
knee joint: the EPOK trial, BMC Geriatr. 23 (1) (2023) 104 , https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12877-023-03828-y .
[75] S. Li, H. Zhou, C. Hu, et al., Total flavonoids of rhizoma drynariae promotes dif -
ferentiation of osteoblasts and growth of bone graft in induced membrane partly by
activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, Front. Pharmacol. 12 (2021) 675470,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2021.675470 .
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                            Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
148