# 1-s2.0-S0021980070800898-main

JOURNAL OF COMBINATORIAL THEORY 9, 327--356 (1970)
Enumeration of Non-Separable Graphs*
ROBERT W. ROBINSON
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720
Communicated by Frank Harary
Received March 1, 1968
ABSTRACT
Non-separable graphs are enumerated, and also graphs without end-points.
The basic enumeration tool is sums of cycle indices of automorphism groups.
1. PRELIMINARIES
For elementary definitions and information on graphs see Harary 5.
The graphs with which we deal have no loops or multiple edges, nor any
labeling of their points or lines. Sections 2, 3, and 4 develop counting
methods in which sums of cycle indices of automorphism groups are the
medium of enumeration. These methods generalize results in which content
generating functions are the medium of enumeration. In particular P61ya's
Haupsatz 11, p. 163 is generalized, along with its applications to the
enumeration of graphs and connected graphs in Harary 4. Historically,
Redfield's decomposition theorem 13, p. 445 was the first step in the
direction of using sums of cycle indices of automorphism groups in com-
binatorial enumeration. Graphs with given blocks are enumerated in
Section 5, and in Section 6 this result is recast to generalize an earlier
solution of this problem by R. Z. Norman. In Section 7 non-separable
(2-connected) graphs are enumerated, along with graphs which are
2-line-connected as a corollary. In Section 8 graphs without end-points
(points of degree 1) are enumerated. We close with some solved and
unsolved problems.
The statement that one has "enumerated" some set of graphs raises
a point which should be self-evident but is sometimes missed. There is
always a brute force procedure for finding out how many graphs there are
with a given number of points and other specified properties, such as
* Much of the material of this paper is contained in the author's honors thesis,
entitled "Methods of Enumeration in Graph Theory," Dartmouth College, 1963,
supervised by Professor Robert Z. Norman.
327
328 ROBINSON
number of lines, connectivity, colorability, symmetry, etc. This is because
there are a finite number of isomorphism types of graphs on a given
number of points, representatives of which can be examined in a finite,
effective way, and the ones with the requisite properties totaled up. Such
a procedure is bound to be inefficient and unpleasing, as well as contri-
buting no insight into the structure of graphs. A good solution to an
enumeration problem should, by contrast, be pleasing and efficient in
practice; this is rarely accomplished without providing some insight into
the structure of graphs. A quick method for finding a number without
dealing directly with graphs at all offers the delight of "something for
nothing." Necessarily, the solution does not provide any new algorithm
for constructing representatives of the graphs involved, except for what
may be suggested indirectly by structure theorems involved in the proof
of the solution.
2. BAsIc GROUP THEORY
Let O be any set of "objects," and 15 any finite group represented as
permutations on O. Notationally, a permutation on O in the representation
of 15 is not distinguished from the element of 15 which it represents.
A type X for 15 and 0 is a map
x : ((g, o) ~15 x 0 l g(o) = o) -~ R,
where R is any commutative ring over the rational numbers, and such that
x(f-lgf, f-l(o)) = x(g, o)
for allfi g ~ 15 and o e O with g(o) = o.
Let 3(0) ----- {g ~ 15 g(o) ----- o}, and T(g) -~ {o E 0 I g(o) = o), for all
o ~ O and g E 15. Let
1 E x(g, o);
zg.~(o)) = J ~(o)l ~<o~
here denotes cardinality. We think of .~(o) as the automorphism group
of O. It is clear that 3(0) ----g-l.~(g(o))g for every g + 15 and o e O.
Hence Zx(~(o))= Zx(~(g(o))), in view of the conjugacy condition
satisfied by X-
Consider ol, o2 e O to be (~-equivalent iff there is some g ~ 15 such that
g(ox) ---- o3 (cid:12)9T his is an equivalence relation; denote by Ethe set of 15-equiv-
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 329
alence classes of O. If ~ ~ E, we take Zx(~) = Zx(,~(o)) for any o ~ ~.
Now if o ~ a ~ E, then
I~ I - I.~(o)1 '
the left cosets of 3(0) being in an obvious 1-1 correspondence with the
objects which are ffi-equivalent to o. Hence we have
Z~(a) = J-~ o~ 13(o)1 Zx(5(o)). (1)
The right-hand side of (1) is, by definition, just
1
I~l (cid:127) Z x(g,o);
o~o g~(o)
now summing over all a ~ E and reversing the summations on the right
yields
E Z~(a) = 1
o~ I ~ t y' E x(g, o). (2)
g~ff) oET(9)
It is interesting to note that Redfield's decomposition theorem 13, p. 445
is an application of (2).
Suppose now that R = Qal, a2, a3 .... , where Q is the ring of
rational numbers. In case O is finite, a type ~: of interest is given by
~(g, o) = I-I a~' g'"),
q~
where v(g, n) is the number of cycles of length n in the disjoint cycle
decomposition of g. ~: is usually called the cycle type. To establish that ~:
satisfies the conjugacy condition, note that, if (ol .... , ok) is a cycle of g,
then (f-a(O1),...,f-l(ok)) is a cycle of f-lgfi Thus v(g, n) = v(f-agfi n)
for all n.
Since the object does not figure in the definition of ~, we can define
~(g) = $(g, o) and
1
ze(~) - I (~ I ~ ~(g)"
Ze(~ ) is called the cycle index of 6i, and is usually written just Z(6i).
Notice that the sum of the coefficients in Z(ff)) is always 1, and that any
monomial I-Ii a~ (i) which appears with a non-zero coefficient in Z(ff~) has
the property that
O : ~ ia(i).
t
330 ROBINSON
If ffi is the automorphism group of a graph G represented as permuta-
tions on the set of points of G, then Ze((5) is abbreviated to Z(G). If o is
a point of G, then 3(0) is the automorphism group of the graph obtained
from G by rooting o (that is, giving o the special status of "root-point"
and requiring that the root-point be preserved in isomorphisms and
automorphisms). Denote by G' the set of non-isomorphic rooted graphs
obtained from G, and let
Z(G') = Z Z(H).
HEG"
Do not include the root-point in the object set of the automorphism group of
any H ~ G'. Then in view of (2) we have
1
z(G') = -- ~ zK-%~))
al treE
i
-- al I~I g ~ eff ) o~ ~ T( ' g ) ~(g)
1
al I o I v,z_., v(g, 1) {:(g)
oe(5
O
OaI Ze({~).
--
In our fully abbreviated notation,
THEOREM 1.
Z(G')=o-~Z(G).
C C
B
C
C C
FIGURE 1
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 331
Theorem 1 was first proved by Norman 7, p. 33 and appears in Ford,
Norman, and Uhlenbeck 3, equation (8). In illustration of the theorem,
let G be the graph in Figure 1. There are 3 (5-equivalence classes (usually
called orbits in this case), which we call A, B, and C, In Figure 1 each
point of G is labeled according to its (5-equivalence class. Then Z(G') =
Z(GA) + Z(GB) + Z(Gc), where Ga is obtained from G by rooting a point
in A, etc. Thus we see that
Z(GA) = ~gal 9 @ ~aalTa2 4- -~6alSa22 + ~-~alSa23 4- ~a13a2a4 4- ~ala24
4- ~ala~2a4 4- la38 4- ~aaa6,
Z(GB) = ~al 9 4- -~aalTa2 + l~-~alSa22 4- ~aa13a23 + ~alaa2a4 + ~ala24
4- 8(cid:1) 9 ,
Z(Gc) = la19 4- la17ae nt - lalSa22 4- lalaa~ a + lal3aeaa,
and finally
Z(G') = {~al 9 4- 8(cid:1) 9 4- ~alSa~2 4- ~-~2a13a2n 4- 8(cid:1) 9 4- lala2 ~
4- lalaz2a~ 4- ~aaa 4- ~aaa~.
On the other hand,
Z(G) = -~eal~ 4- ,aa18az 4- -~aa16az ~ 4- -~ga14a~3 4- ~a~aa~a~ -q- ~alZa2~
@ 18.."11 2 ,~.-~ 21'~1 4- ~alaa z 4- ~alaaa~.
Now Theorem 1 is easily verified for this example.
3. BASIC COMBINATORIAL PRINCIPLE
Let B be a finite set, A any set, S any commutative ring over Q, and
t:A (cid:141) B---~ S. Then
l-I t(r(b), b) = 1- ~ t(a, b), (3)
"r~A B b~B b~B a~A
provided that the summations are well defined. This is a direct result of
the distributive law in S.
Now suppose that D is a finite set, N is the set of natural numbers,
Fis a finite or denumerable set, and r : F (cid:141) N -~ S is such that Zq~ r(q, n)
is well defined for each n ~ N. In addition let the group (5 be represented as
permutations on D. Then (5 has a natural representation as permutations
on F D by the rule
g(v)(d) = v(g-l(d)),
5821914-2
332 ROBINSON
for any g E 15, .,7 ~ F D, and d ~ D. For any g E 15 let cyc(g) be the set of
disjoint cycles of which g (as a permutation on D) is the product. Now
g(~) = ~/ if and only if ~/ is constant on each cycle of g; that is, viewing g
as a permutation on F D, T(g) = F cycle). This justifies the notation ~/(~)
in case ), ~ cyc(g) and g(~/) = ~/.
A type X for 15 and F D is given by
x(g, r/) = I r(7/(y), lh(7))
for any g e 15 and ~/~ T(g), where lh(y) is the "length" (cardinality) of y.
To verify that X satisfies the conjugacy condition, note first that
f-i(~) ~ cyc(f-lgf) just if y E cyc(g), as was seen in Section 2. Then if f,
g ~ 15 and ~ ~ T(g) we have
x(f-lgf, f-l(~)) = I- r(f-107)(3), lh(~))
~eye(l-lgy)
= I- r(f-(~l)(f-l(r)), lh(/-l(Y)))
= I-I r(~(~,), lh(r))
= x(g, ~/) as required.
In the usual parlance of Pdlya's counting theorem, D is the "domain,"
F the "figure set," and F D the set of "configurations." Let config be the set
of N-equivalence classes of F D. Then, by (2),
1
Z zx )-o E E x(g, n)
a~conflg 0~ ~T(9)
1
9~(~ ,EF eye(g) V~CyC(O)
by definition; then, by (3),
-- ~ Z I Z r(q, lh(~,)).
g~l~i v~eye(ff) q~F
If X e R and h : N --~ S then we write Xa~ --+ h(i) for the image of X
under the homomorphism of R into S which preserves Q and takes as
to h(i) for each i ~ N. In this notation
Z Z~(o) = Z(15) a~ ~ Z r(q, i). (4)
a~onflg q~F
ENUMERATION OF NoN-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 333
Now suppose that Dx ..... D~ are subsets of D which are unions of
orbits of 15; that is, for each 1 ~< k ~< m and g e 15, g permutes the ele-
ments of Dk among themselves. Usually the sets D~ are mutually disjoint,
but that is not necessary. Assume also that, for each 1 ~< k ~< m and
each n ~ N, there is a (distinct) indeterminant ak.n in S. Then a generaliza-
tion ~(D~ .... , D~) of the cycle type is given by the rule
~(D~ ..... D)(g) = fi 1-I a~(.~" k''~)
k~l n
for all g ~ 15, where v(g, k, n) is the number of cycles of length n which are
in Dk in the disjoint cycle decomposition of g. The generalized cycle index
Ze(D~. .... D~)(15) is abbreviated ZD~. .... D~(15). Generalized cycle indices were
introduced by P61ya 11, p. 174 and are essential in Robinson 15.
In general, when m ---- 2, a~.~ and a2.~ are replaced by a~ and b~, respec-
tively.
Once subsets of the domain are distinguished, it is natural to consider
corresponding figure sets F~ ,..., F~, and take config to be the set of
15-equivalence classes of
FDxl X Fy2 X ... X T~ ,~.
The map r is then replaced by a sequence of maps r, : F~ (cid:141) N ~ R for
all 1 ~ k <~ m, and the type X is now determined by the rule
x(g, ~?) = fi l-I rk(~7(y), lh(~)).
k=l v~Cyefg).rSD k
Then, in much the same way that (4) is proved, one can show that
Zx(~) = ZD1 ..... 0,~(15) a~.~---~ ~ rk(q, n). (5)
a~conflg q~f~
To apply (5) to the enumeration of graphs, consider the symmetric
group ~ on the set P of n points. Let L be the set of two element subsets
of P; then ~,, has a natural representation as permutations on L. The
generalized cycle index Ze, L(~,~) and its computation are discussed in
Robinson 15, pp. 182-3. Let Hn denote the set of (non-isomorphic)
graphs on n points, and H the set of all graphs. In general, if X _C H then
we write Z(X) for the sum Zc~x Z(G). We find Z(I-In) by making a corre,
spondence between the graphs on n points and the ~-equivalence classes
of configurations from P and L into Fp = {0} and FL = {0, 1}, respectively.
Since Fe has only one element, the points are unrestricted; each point pair,
334 ROBINSON
however, is sent either to 0 (in case they are non-adjacent in the corre-
sponding graph) or to 1 (in case they are adjacent in the corresponding
graph). An appropriate choice of re and rz is rp(0, i) = ai and rL(0, i) =
rL(1, i) = 1 for all i E N. If ~7, ~ are any configurations and A, B are the
corresponding graphs, then A and B are isomorphic just if ~ and ~ are
~-equivalent. Moreover Z~(I(~))) = Z(A). Thus (5) gives us
THEOREM 2.
Z(Hn) = Ze,L(~)a, --+ a~; bi --~ 2.
Z(H) is determined by Z(H) = 5Z,~N Z(H.). The empty graph K 0 is
treated as a separate case. By definition Z(Ko)= 1. For the sake of
completeness we note that
Z(~.) = Z I a~'
l~i4n Vit ivi (6)
and
v i . v~ i-1 1~v ivj(i'j)
Zp.L(~n) = E r ar b~(2) +-T~,+~,, I~ v,,~ . (7)
l~i<j~n
The summations in (6) and (7) are over all n-tuples (v1 ..... v,) of non-
negative integers such that
n = ~ ivi.
Relation (6) is well known and relation (7) has been justified by Harary
4, equation (10) and Robinson 16.
For illustration take n = 4. The 11 non-isomorphic graphs on 4 points
appear in Figure 2, and the cycle indices of their automorphism groups
are given in Table 1. These sum to
Sa4
1 + 4a12a2 -k 2a~ 2 -k ~ala3 -~- a4,
which is also the value of Z(H4) obtained from Theorem 2.
A somewhat finer result than Theorem 2 for each n ~ N is
Ze, L(Hn) : Ze,r(~)ai --+ ai; bi --+ 1 -k b~.
Of course Zp, L(H) = Z~=I Ze,L(Hn). The proof is similar to that of
Theorem 2 except that rz is replaced by rL*, where rz*(0, i)= 1 and
rL*(1,i) : bi for all i E N. This just has the effect of introducing a factor
of b~ for every line cycle of length i in the cycle index of the automorphism
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 335
2 3
5 6
8 9
I0 II
FIGURE 2
TABLE 1
Properties of the Graphs on 4 Points
Non- Has an
G Z(G) Connected separable end-point
1 ~a14 + ~1a l ~a .. + la2~ + 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 8 no no no
2 la14 + ~1a ~ 2a 2 + (cid:1)88 2 no no yes
3 lala __ ~1 al 2a 2 no no yes
4 ~al4 + ~a~Saz + ~az ~ + ~a, no no yes
5 (cid:1)89 4 + -~a2a2 yes no yes
6 ~a14 + ~1 a~ 2a 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 no no no
7 ~al4 + ~all ~a2 + 1alas yes no yes
8 ~al" + kalea~ + ~az ~ + ka, yes yes no
9 8(cid:1) 9 4 + 8(cid:1) 9 yes no yes
I0 ~al ~ + ~1 al 2a ~ + ~az 2 yes yes no
11 ~1a l 4 + ~a12a~ + ~a22 + l ala3 + ~a~ yes yes no
336 ROBINSON
group of the graph which corresponds to each configuration. To justify
the notation Ze,L(H), view the automorphism group of any graph as
acting on its points P and its lines L. For instance, let K~ be the complete
graph on n points and K~ its complement, the discrete graph. Then we have
ZI,,L(Kn) Zp,L(Kn).
by definition Zp,L(~n) = and Z(~)
=
Recall that, in Z(H), a term I-L a~ must correspond to a graph on
3"4 iv~ points. Thus, Z(H)a~ ~ xq is an old-style generating function for
graphs; the coefficient of x" is the number of graphs on n points. Similarly
Ze.i~(H)ai ~ xi; bi ~ yl
is a generating function in which the coefficient of xmy j is the number of
graphs on m points which have exactly j lines.
4. BASIC COUNTING THEOREM
First we need a generalization of the composition of two permutation
groups (also called the krantz or wreath product), and a formula for its
cycle index. Suppose that the finite group {5 is represented as permutations
on the finite set D, and that D1 ,..., Dm is a partition of D into unions of
orbits of (5. Given finite groups 91 ..... 9,~ represented as permutations
on the finite sets E 1 ..... Era, respectively, the generalized composition
ffi91 ..... 9m is a group of permutations on
~)D~ (cid:141) E~
which is in a natural correspondence with
15 (cid:141) 1 (cid:141) ... (cid:141)
Ifg e 15 and r~ ~ 9~ (cid:12)9 for all 1 ~<k ~< m, then the corresponding permuta-
tion (g, T1 ..... ~'m) in 15191 ..... 9m is determined by the rule:if
(d, u) e D~ (cid:141) E~., then
( g, "gl -r,,)(d, u) = ( g(cO, "r~(d)(u)).
.....
Intuitively, 15191 ..... 9,~ acts on copies of sets Ek for 1 ~< k ~< m, one
for each element of D. The entire copies of the sets E, are permuted
according to the action of 15, and the elements of each copy of Ek are
permuted independently according to the action of 9~ (cid:12)9
The composition theorem of P61ya 11, p. 180 generalizes to
Z(l~i91 ..... 9m) = ZD1. .... D,,(qi)ae.i ~ Z(gk)aa ~ aij. (8)
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 337
The right-hand side of (8) is abbreviated
Z, 1. .... ,m(15)Z(~l) ..... Z(~).
Pdlya's proof for his composition theorem can be adapted to proving (8);
this involves using a generalization of his counting theorem 11, p. 174 in
place of the ordinary version 11, p. 163.
Now let us return to the situation of Section 3. That is, we have a finite
group 15 represented as permutations on a finite set D, and a set F of
figures. Suppose in addition that each element Q E F is a finite set, with
an associated group ~(Q) of permutations on Q. Think of ~(Q) as the
automorphism group of Q. We assume that, for every j ~ N, I Q ~< j
for only finitely many Q e F. This insures that ~.o~FZ(~(Q)) is well
defined. Now let
r(Q, n) = Z(.~(Q))al --~ ain
for all n ~ N and Q ~ F, and let X be defined from r as in Section 3. Take
a typical configuration ~ ~F ~ and suppose that the range of ~ is
{Q1 ..... Qm}. Successively applying definitions and then (8), we have
1
Zx('~(0) -- I ~(~)l ~ 1-I r(~(7), lh(7))
g~(~) "/eCyC(g)
1
-I~(~)1 Z I-
Z(.~(~(7)))a,--+aah(.,)
ge~(~) ~cyc(g)
= Z~_,(o p ..... ~_,to,~)(~(O)Z(.~(Q1)) ..... z(.~(Q,~))
= Z(-~(~)~(Q1) ..... ~(Qm)).
Let the group ~(~)~(Q1),-.., ~(Q~) be called ~e~t(~). What we have
seen is that Z(~ext(~)) = Z~(-~(~7)) for any ~7 ~ FD- Then put Z(crexO =
Z~(a) for any cr E config; evidently Z(aex0 = Z (~~e- xt(~/)) for all ~ e ~r.
Now (4) applies, to give
E Z(~ Z(15)a n ~ ~,, Z(~(Q))~j--> aSn. (9)
a~config OEF
The right-hand side of (9) is abbreviated
Relation (9) is a generalization of Polya's Haupsatz ll, p. 153 in
the case of figure-counting series in one variable. Its usefulness to graph
theory is in applications where D is the point set of a graph, the automor-
phism group of which is 15; F is a set of graphs; ~(Q) is the automorphism
338 ROBINSON
group of Q for each Q e F; and -~ext(V) is the automorphism group of a
graph which corresponds to 7. It is convenient to think of {(d, q) l d e D and
q e ~7(d)}, the object set of -3ext(~), as consisting of copies of sets in F
which are related to D by 7. Then -3ext(~)) allows these copies to be per-
muted among themselves by ~(~), that is, by any permutation of 15 on D
leaving ,/fixed. ~ext(~)) also allows the elements of each copy of a set Q
in the range of ~7 to be permuted according to the action of ~(Q), the
automorphism group of Q. In fact -~ext(V) is generated by those permuta-
tions.
Let C be the set of connected graphs. With the help of (9), Z(C) will
be determined from Z(H). For each n e N let H(n) be the set of graphs
which have exactly n connected components. Consider G e H(n) and
: {1 ..... n} --~ C to correspond just if each connected component of G
occurs an equal number of times in G and in the range of ~. This establishes
a 1-1 correspondence between H(~) and classes of configurations from
{1,..., n} into C under the equivalence relation induced by the symmetric
group ~n on {1,..., n}. Moreover, if G and ~ are equivalent, then the
automorphism group of G acting on its points is permutationally isomor-
phic to -3ext(~) if we associate with each graph in C (now the figure set)
its automorphism group as a graph. Thus, by (9)
Z(H(.)) = Z(~.)Z(C).
Summing over all n ~ N and using the well-known identity
1 + Z(~) = exp --k-'
n~l k=l
we obtain
oo
1 @ Z(H) = exp ~ a~ Z(C). (10)
Relation (10) is a direct generalization of equation (33) of Harary 4,
which was first observed by Riddell 14. We can now invert (10), foUowing
an idea of Cadogan 1 for using the MSbius function/~. First
a/_z(_i)_ _A log(1 + Z(H)) = /~(~) a~---A ~ -k- Z(C)
i=1 i i=1 i Eke1
~ aik
/(C)
= ~(i) W
i=l ~=i
m=l iim
= z(c),
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 339
the latter since
~0 if m > 1.
~~l,,/, ~(i)~- II if m = 1.
Using the identity
(--1)5+1
log(1 -1- Z(H)) = Z . Z(H)~,
~=1 J
we have
THEOREM 3.
pt(i) ~ (--1) j+l
z(c) = ~ --7- y" " a?Z(It).
i=1 j=l J
From Theorem 2 we have
Z(H) = al + al ~ + a2 + ~al 3 -t- 2alaz -}- w + ~al 4 -t- 4a12a2
+ 2a~ 2 + kala3 + a~ + ""
through the terms of order 4. For the remainder of the paper we adopt the
convention that, whenever some terms of Z(X) for some X _C H are
presented followed by dots, they consist exactly of the terms of order ~< k
for some k e N. From Theorem 3, then, we find
Z(C) = al + 8(cid:1) 9 ~ + 8(cid:1) 9 + ~al 3 + ala2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + x1~9-,i 4 2r- 2alZa~
+ 8(cid:1) 8 z -t- ~alaa + 8(cid:1) 9 + "".
This result is readily verified in the terms of order 4 by adding the cycle
indices of the automorphism groups of the connected graphs on 4 points,
which are listed in Table 1.
By taking advantage of the exponentiation, (10) can be inverted more
easily than by a direct application of Theorem 3. Let Ci be the set of
connected graphs on j points, and H ~) the set of graphs, every connected
component of which has at least j points. Then H m = H, the terms of
order j in Z(H (j)) give just Z(Ci), and from (10) we have
1 -1- Z(H Ij+l)) = (1 + Z(H(J))) exp --~a~-- z(cj).
k=l
Thus Z(Cj) is determined inductively for each j, and of course Z(C) =
0o
~2~=1 Z(C~). This method of inversion is also very efficient in the case of
ordinary generating functions.
340 ROBINSON
Theorem 3 is easily generalized to include line cycle parameters. In fact,
eo rx~
Zp L(C)= ~ /_t(i) ~ (--1) ~+~
' i~1 ~ j a/Zp.L(H),
where Ze.r(H) stands for
ai ~ Ze,z(H)aj --~ ai~; b~ -+ bit.
The proof is similar to that of Theorem 3, but it involves generalizing the
idea of the composition of permutation groups even further, as in Robinson
15, and calling on a formula for its cycle index. A formula for Ze.z(H)
is mentioned at the end of Section 3. As before,
Z(C)ai ~ x i and Ze.L(C)ai --~ xi; bi ~ yi
are old-style generating functions for C, with the number of points and
the number of points and lines as enumeration parameters, respectively.
5. GRAPHS WITH GIVEN BLOCKS
Recall that a graph is connected just if it contains a path joining any two
points and is non-empty. A cut-point is a point of a graph the deletion of
which leaves a disconnected graph. A non-separable, or 2-connected, graph
is a connected graph with no cut-points. A block of a graph is a maximal
non-separable subgraph. The one-point graph K 1 is always treated as a
special case; K1 is connected but not 2-connected, and contains no blocks.
In every other connected graph it is easy to see that every point is contained
in some block.
Some of the considerations which follow concerning the decomposition
of a graph into blocks may be found in Tutte 17. To a great extent we
have supplied our own arguments for the sake of completeness and con-
tinuity.
Let D be a set of non-separable graphs, and K the set of all connected
graphs the blocks of which are all in D. Our object is to find Z(K) from
Z(D). First, it is convenient to do the rooted case, that is, to find Z(K')
from Z(D'). In this we follow closely the methods of Norman 7, appro-
priately generalized to yield sums of cycle indices of automorphism
groups. A brief exposition of this portion of Norman's dissertation is to
be found in Ford et al. 3.
A branch of a connected graph G at a point u is a maximal connected
subgraph of G which does not contain u as a cut-point. If G is connected
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 341
and contains more than one point, every branch at u must contain u, and
each point of G is contained in a branch of G at u. Moreover, two branches
of G at u contain only the point u in common, else their union would be
a connected subgraph of G in which u is not a cut-point. It follows that
each block of G is contained in exactly one branch of G at u, and con-
versely each block of a branch at u is a block of G.
Let K,' be the subset of K' consisting of those graphs with exactly n
branches at the root-point. The one-point rooted graph is the only element
of K' not contained in one of K,' for n ~ N. Thus
Z(K') = 1 + ~ Z(KI,').
In view of the considerations of the preceding paragraph, we correspond
each element G of Kn' with the ~-equivalence class of the configuration
from {1,..., n} into K l' which takes each 1 ~< k ~< n into the k-th branch at
the root-point, considering each branch to be rooted at the old root-point.
This correspondence is 1-1 and preserves automorphism groups, so that
(9) applies and
z(K.') = Z(~)Z(K,').
Summing over n,
0o ai
Z(K') = exp E --/- Z(K,'). (11)
i=1
LZMMA 1. If G is a connected graph other than K1, then a point u is
a cut-point of G just if it is contained in more than one block of G.
Proof. If u is a cut-point of G, there must be at least two branches of G
at u. Then u must belong to at least one block in each of these branches,
and we have seen that the blocks of the branches are blocks of G. Con-
versely, suppose that u is not a cut-point of G and is contained in blocks
B1, B~ of G. Bx and B~ must contain at least two points each, and hence
must contain points vl and v2, respectively, which are different from u.
Since u is not a cut-point of G, there must be a path from vl to v2 which
does not contain u. The union of B1, B~, and this path is seen to be
non-separable. Thus B1 = B 2 , and we conclude that u is in just one block
of G.
A limb of G at a subgraph His a connected component of the graph G*
obtained from G by deleting all the lines which are in H. It is clear that any
pair of distinct limbs of G must be disjoint, for if not disjoint their union
would be a connected subgraph of G*. If G is connected, then any limb of
G at a non-empty subgraph H must contain at least one point of H. For
342 ROBINSON
a minimal path from some point in a limb to H must contain only lines
outside of H, that is, lines which are in G*.
LEMMA 2. If B is a block of a connected graph G, each limb of G at B
contains exactly one point of B.
Proof. Since B is non-separable it is non-empty, so that a limb of G
at B must contain a point of B. Now suppose that u, v are distinct points
of B which are in the same limb of G at B. Then there is a path from u
to v containing no line of B. Evidently the union of B with this path is a
non-separable subgraph of G which properly contains B. This is impossible,
so no limb of G at B contains more than one point of B.
Suppose A and B are distinct blocks of a graph G. They have at most one
point in common, for otherwise their union would be non-separable and
A = B. Thus no line of G is in both A and B. Consequently, in the graph
G* obtained by deleting the lines of B from G, all the lines of A remain and
A is a block of G*. Any point of G which is in no block of G besides B
becomes an isolated point of G*, not in any block of G*. Thus the blocks
of G* are just all of the blocks of G except B.
Suppose G E KI'; call the root point u. Since G is a single branch at u,
G is connected and u is not a cutpoint of G. By Lemma 1, then, u is in
just one block of G, which we call the root-block. By Lemma 2, a limb of G
at the root-block contains a unique point of the root-block. Then we
associate with G the configuration which maps each point x of B other than
u to the limb of G at B which contains x, and is rooted at x. Each rooted
limb is seen to be in K'. In this manner we establish a 1-1 correspondence
between elements of Ks' which have root and root-block isomorphic to
some B1 e D' and the configurations from B1 into K'. This correspondence
preserves automorphism groups. Applying (9) and summing over all of the
rooted blocks in D' gives
Z(KI' ) = Z(D')a~Z(K'). (12)
The factor of a~ is to restore the roots of the limbs, which are not the root
of the entire configuration. Notice that K' contains the constant term 1
for the one-point rooted graph, so that the possibility of isolated limbs is
accounted for. Also, the limb at the root-point of any element of K(
is always isolated, so it is correct not to allow the configuration to map
the root-point into K'.
From (11) and (12) we have
THEOREM 4.
oo
p tZ(D z(K')11
' = ex ' a 1 .
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 343
Evidently Theorem 4 suffices to determine Z(K') from Z(D'). From
Theorem 1 we have
Z(K')=g~-aZ(K).
Z(D') =~IZ(D) and
By the fundamental theorem of calculus
a 1
Z(K) = f Z(K') dal + Z(K)al --+ 0.
0
Our attention is now focused on fixed-point free automorphisms of
graphs in K. In order to enumerate these we need
THEOREM 5. Every connected graph which has a fixed-point free auto-
morphism has a unique block which is invariant under all automorphisms of
the graph. No other block is invariant under any fixed-point free auto-
morphism of the graph.
Proof. A block of a connected graph G is an end-block just if it contains
at most one cut-point of G. It is straightforward that any connected graph
besides/(1 has at least one end-block. (See Tutte 17, 9.58.) Let H be any
graph; let H ~~ = H, and for all n ~ 0 let H (~+*) be the subgraph of H (~)
consisting of those blocks of H ~'*) which are not end-blocks of H (").
If H ~") :/= ;~, then H ("+1) is a proper subgraph of H ~"). For, if H (") is/s
then H ~n+l~ is empty. IfH I") is not 321, then it contains an end-block, say B.
Now B contains at least two points, but only one is a cut-point of H I")
(that is, contained in a different block of HC~)). Thus at least one point of B
is not in H I"+~).
Now let m be the greatest integer such that H ('') is not empty. We have
seen that there must be such an m. Call H ~) the nucleus of H. The nucleus
must be preserved by every automorphism of H. If H ~'~ is 321, then that
point is fixed by every automorphism of H. Suppose instead that H ~")
contains n > 1 blocks. Since H ('+~) = ~, each block of H ~m) is an end-
block of H ~'~. Let u be a cut-point of H ~J, C a branch of H ~) at u, and B
the unique block of C which contains u. Any cut-point of C is a cut-point
of H ('), so B contains no such point. For B is an end-block of H ~'*~ and
already contains the cut-point u of H ~m), which is not a cut-point of C.
It follows that C = B. Thus each branch at u is a single block, and u is
the unique cut-point of H ~). Obviously u must be fixed by every automor-
phism of H Ira), hence of H.
The only remaining possibility for a graph H with a fixed-point free
automorphism is that its nucleus H ~'~ be a single block of H. Now suppose
344 ROBINSON
that some block B of H other than H (~) is left invariant by some automor-
phism h of H. Then h leaves invariant the whole limb, call it C, of H at
H tin) which contains B. Since h leaves C and H (m) both invariant, it fixes
the single point which is their intersection. Thus H (~) is left invariant by
every automorphism of H, but a fixed-point free automorphism of H
leaves no other block of H invariant.
Take B ~ D and a map ~ : B ~ K', a typical configuration. We identity
each point x of B with the root-point of ~(x), and call the resulting graph
~*. Then ~* is in K, and the subgraph B~ of ~* with which B has become
identified is isomorphic to B. Any element of-3ext(~) corresponds to an
automorphism of ~* of the same cycle type which leaves B c fixed. Thus,
if B ~ is not the nucleus of ~*, then by Theorem 5 ~.~ext(~) has no fixed-point
free elements. Conversely, any automorphism of ~* which leaves B ~ fixed
must correspond to an element of-~ext(0. By Theorem 5 every auto-
morphism of ~* must leave B ~ fixed if it is the nucleus, so in that case
-~ext(0 is permutationally isomorphic to the automorphism group of ~*.
Now, if ~ : B ~ K' is also such that Be is the nucleus of ~* it is evident
that ~* ~ ~* just if ~ and ~ are .~(B)-equivalent as configurations. Apply-
ing (9), we see that
Z(B)alZ(K') al --* 0,
which is equal to
Z(B)al --+ OalZ(K'),
just gives the fixed-point free contribution to Z(K) from those elements of
K, the nuclei of which are isomorphic to B. Summing over all B ~ D,
Z(K)al ~ 0 = Z(D)al --+ 0a~Z(K'),
or
THEOREM 6.
S?
Z(K) ----- Z(K') dal + Z(D)al --* 0alZ(K').
Together Theorems 4 and 6 determine Z(K) from Z(D). As an example,
take the case that D = {K2}. Let T be the set of connected graphs all the
blocks of which are isomorphic to/(2 (cid:12)9 The elements of T are called trees.
The trees on less than 7 points are pictured in Figure 3. In this case
Z({K2}') = al, so that by Theorem 4
Z(T') = exp ~, a~. alZ(T').
ENUMBRATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 345
The determination of Z(T') from this relation is a recursive procedure;
we illustrate one step. Suppose we already have
Z(T') = 1 + al + }a~ ~ + 8(cid:1) 9 + ~8 a ~3 + a~a~ + 8(cid:1)9
4-(cid:1)89 al ~ + 8(cid:1) 8 4- {a2 ~ + ~axa3 + 8(cid:1) 8 4- ....
Then
a~Z(T') ~ ax + al ~ + -~al~ 4- (cid:1)89 + -~al~ 4- al2a~ 4- 8(cid:1) 9
+ (cid:1)89 ~ + ~al3az + ~ala2 ~ + ~al2az 4- (cid:1)88 + "".
Now
~ ai 5
-:- = 1 4- E Z($~) 4- "",
~=1 I .4=1
so that
5
Z(T') = 1 4- ~ Z(~)alZ(T') 4- "".
j=l
Thus we compute the terms of order 5 in 5 contributions;
Z(~I)alZ(T') .... 4- 8(cid:1) 9 + ~alZa2 4- ~ala22 4- ~a12a3
4- ~ala4 4- "",
Z(~2)a~Z(T') .... + ~a~ 5 4- w 4- 8(cid:1) 9 4- "",
Z(~)fa~Z(T') .... + ~al ~ + a?a~ + ~a~a~~ + "..,
Z(~4)a~Z(T') .... 4- ~al 5 4- 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 9 + "",
Z(~5)alZ(T') = r(cid:1)89 5 4- 1J-~al3a2 4- 8(cid:1) 9 ~ 4- ~a12az 4- 8(cid:1) 8
4- ~a2aa 4- }as + "'..
In all, the terms of order 5 in Z(T') are
_~_a l 5 4- 8(cid:1) 9 + ~ala~~ 4- ~a~2a3 4- (cid:1)89 4- ~a~aa 4- -1~ a 5 .
Now Z({Kz})a~ ~ 0 = (cid:1)89 so by Theorem 6
Z(T) = Z(T') da~ 4- ~ a2alZ(T')l.
Then
(cid:1)89 = 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 9 + ~a2 3 4- la~a~ + "",
and
Z(T) = al + 8(cid:1) 9 2 + la~ + 1a13 + 8(cid:1) 9 + w 4 + ~1a l 2a ~
+ 8(cid:1) 9 z + (cid:1)89 + ~25,.,1, 5 + ~a13a2 4- -~ala2z + 8(cid:1) 9
+ kala~ + ~al ~ + . 4 -a 1 4 a + ~al2a2~ + 8(cid:1) 9 4- ~a2 3
+ }al2a4 4- }a2aa 4- ~ala2a3 4- ala5 4- "".
346 ROBINSON
This is readily checked by totaling the cycle indices of the automorphism
groups of the trees on fewer than 7 points, which are listed in Table 2.
I 2 3
8 I
9 I0 I 12
_- __ I
I
13. _
/:
\ :
FmURE 3
TABLE 2
Cycle Indices of the Automorphism Groups
of the Trees on Fewer than 7 Points
Tree Cycle index of the automorphism group
1 a I
2 (cid:1)89 z 4- ~1 a2
3 (cid:1)89 n 4- 1-ala2
4 ~1 a~ 4 4- ~1 a~ fa
5 la14 4- ~all 2a2 4- -1-alan
6 (cid:1)89 4- ~1a la~ 2
7 ~a15 4- I z
~al a~
8 ~+al n + ka,aa2 4- ~ala2 2 4- ~all ~aa + lala,
9 ~1a l 6 + 8(cid:1) 9 ~
10 la~6 4- la~a2 4- ~a12a2~ -t- ka=n 4- -~-a2a,
11 g1 al 64-1 ~al 4a ~
12 la16 4- 8(cid:1) 9 + za aaz
13 la16 4- .1_".~1 e~.~ 2
14 T21- ~a, 6 4- ~alaa~ 4- ~a12a2n 4- lalnaz 4- laxazaa 4- la12a, 4- ~a~a5
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 347
Trees were first enumerated by Cayley 2. Otter 9 provided the first
treatment in terms of generating functions. Our result gives more informa-
tion about trees, but at the cost of greater complexity. Prins 12 has gone
to the logical extreme of giving a procedure for generating explicitly the
number of trees with each automorphism group.
Harary and Uhlenbeck 6 solved the problem of enumerating all con-
nected graphs with certain specific sets of blocks. Norman 7 provided
the solution for any given set of blocks. His method is described briefly
by Ford et al. 3. Our method of determining Z(K) from Z(D) and Z(K')
is quite different from the corresponding step in Norman's solution.
The next section is devoted to deriving a direct generalization of Norman's
solution.
Line parameters are easily introduced into our results. For ease in
expressing generalizations of Theorems 1, 4, and 6 we make the following
convention. If
W, X, Y~ Qal, a2 ,...; bl, b2 .... 1,
then WX; Y is short for
Wai --+ Xa~ --+ aik; b~ --+ bin; bi --+ Ya~ --+ aiG b~ --+ bik.
Then if X _C H,
z~,L(x') = ~ z~, L(x).
Also
oo
ak
Ze,L(K') = exp ~, -k-- Ze,L(D')a~Zv,L(K'); bi
k=l
and
S: 1
Zp.L(K) : Zp,L(K') dax -q- Ze,L(D)al --+ OalZe.L(K'); bl.
Thus Zp,L(K ) is determined from Ze,L(D). We may, of course, substitute y*
for b~ for all i E N in these results in case it is just the number of lines that
is of interest.
For trees the introduction of line parameters is particularly easy. One
sees that
Zp, z(T') : Z(T')ai -+ a~bi
and
Ze,z(T) = fl 1 Ze,L(T') dal + l bl(a2aaZe,L(T')).
582/9/4-3
348 ROBINSON
6. NORMAN'S FORMULA FOR GRAPHS WITH GIVEN BLOCKS
AS in the previous section, D is a set of non-separable graphs and K
is the set of all connected graphs, the blocks of which are in D.
THEOREM 7.
Z(K) = (ai + Z(D) -- alZ(D'))alZ(K').
Proof. Let W---- (al + Z(D) -- alZ(D'))alZ(K'). It suffices to show
that Wal ~ 0 ---- Z(K)al --~ 0 and
Oa---~ W = Z(K).
First, Wai ~ 0 ---- Z(D)aiZ(K')a 1 ~ 0 directly, and the latter was
seen to be Z(K)al -+ 0 in the proof of Theorem 6. In order to deal with
the derivatives, it is convenient to have the following
LEMMA 3. If X, Y6Qai, a2 .... , then
OaI (XY) = ~ X Y~a 1 1.
Proof. By the chain rule,
8ai (XY) = ~ Y ~ (alY) q- -..
+ (T~-aX~ ) Y ~ (anY) + "'"
But anY = Yaj --~ an~, so that ifn > 1 then
ea-~ (anY) = 0.
On the other hand, aiY = Y.
According to the lemma we have, as a result of applying ~/~al to the
identity of Theorem 4,
z(K')(( 0
~ai ~ Z(D')alZ(K')) (Z(K') -t- a~-~ai
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 349
On the other hand, our lemma appfied to the definition of W gives
0 W = (1 --al ~al Z(D'))alZ(K') (Z(K')+ ax ~ Z(K'))
~al
= Z(I(') --~ a 1 Z(K') Z(K') Z(I~')) alZ(K') )
( Z(K')).
(cid:12)9 ~Z(~') +
al~a 1
(~/~al) (D/Oal)
In view of our formula for Z(K'), this reduces to W = Z(K').
But
Z(IC) = ~ Z(K)
by Theorem 1, so the proof of Theorem 7 is complete.
When sums of cycle indices ofautomorphism groups are the enumeration
medium Theorem 6 is much easier to use than Theorem 7. However,
Theorem 6 has no analog for ordinary generating functions, whereas in
Theorem 7 one can replace Z(K) and Z(K') by ordinary generating
functions(cid:12)9 In this connection it is worth while to note that, in Theorem 4
also, Z(K') can be replaced by an ordinary generating function.
As at the end of Section 5 we can introduce line parameters into our
results. Theorem 7 takes the form
Ze,z(K) = (ax q- Ze,r(D) al p r(D ))axZe,z(K ), bl.
-- Z ! ! ~
7. NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS
Let B be the set of all non-separable graphs, and B n the ones on n points.
From Theorem 4 we have
~a-o'= 1=a ~ Z(B')alZ(C').
Z(C') = exp (13)
The calculation of Z(C) is discussed in Section 4, and by Theorem 1
z(c') - 0 Z(C).
Thus we need only invert (13) to find Z(B'). The simplest method of
inversion conceptually is not in this case the easiest to carry out. The
method we present takes advantage of the exponentiation for its efficiency.
350 ROBINSON
Let C'c~) be the set of rooted connected graphs such that any block con-
taining the root-point contains at least n points. Then Z(C'I2)) = Z(C'),
the terms of order n -- 1 in Z(CI,)) give Z(B.'), and from (13)
Z(C(i", +l)) = Z(C(n(cid:12)9) ) (e xp k=~ __Tl --ae Z(Bn')alZ(C') )
.
Thus Z(B.') is determined for each n ~ N inductively, and
oo
z(s') = Z Z(B.'),
n=2
From Theorem 6 we find that
Z(C)a~ ~ 01 = Z(B)al -+ Oa~Z(C') (14)
If B I'~) denotes the set of non-separable graphs on at least n points, then
(14) gives
Z(B~S~)al --+ 0alZ(C') = Z(C)a 1 -~ 0,
the terms of order n in Z(BInl)al -~ 0alZ(C') give exactly Z(B,)al --~ 0,
and
Z(B~n+n)a~ ~ 0alZ(C') = Z(BC"~)a~ --+ 0a~Z(C')
-- Z(Bn)a 1 ~ 0lalZ(C').
Thus the inversion of (14) yields Z(Bn)a 1 ~ 0 inductively for each n,
and summing gives Z(B)al --+ 01. Finally
S?
Z(B) = Z(B') da~ + Z(B)a~ ~ 0.
We illustrate the computation of the first few terms of Z(B). From
Section 4 we have
Z(CIz)) = Z(C') = 1 + a I @ 2al ~ + as + ~-~ -}- 4ala2 + az + "",
so Z(B2' ) = al. Then
Z(B2')alZ(C')I = a~Z(C') = al + a~ ~ + 2a~ 3 + alas @ ...
and
oo --a/~
exp ~ T Z(B2')alZ(C') = 1 -- al -- (cid:1)89 2 -- (cid:1)89 -- ~al 3
-- (cid:1)89 -- 8(cid:1) 9 T "".
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 351
Multiplying this by Z(C'~z)) gives
Z(C~3>) = 1 + (cid:1)89 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + ~al 3 + 2ala2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + "'"
and
Z(B3') = (cid:1)89 2 + (cid:1)89
Now
Z(B3')alZ(C') = (cid:1)89 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 -1- al 3 -b- "",
exp ~ Z(B3')axZ(C') = 1 -- la~2 -- la2 -- al 3 ~:...,
and multiplying the latter by Z(CI3)) gives
Z(CI4)) : 1 Jr- ~al 3 + 2ala~ -- 8(cid:1) 9 @ "".
In all, then,
Z(B') = al -q- (cid:1)89 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + ~al 3 -- 2ala2 -- -31a 3 -- "'" (cid:12)9
For the fixed-point free contribution,
Z(BIZ))al --+ 0 alZ(C') = Z(C)al -+ 0
= 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 9 @ -a2 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 q- "".
Then
Z(Bz)a 1 --+ 0 = (cid:1)89
Z(B2)al ~ 0alz(c') = 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 9 ~ + "",
and
Z(BI3))al -->- 0alZ(C') = 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 8 ~ + 8(cid:1) 9 + "'" (cid:12)9
In turn
Z(B3)a 1 --+ O = (cid:1)89
Z(B3)a 1 ~ 0 a~Z(C') = 8(cid:1) 9 -k "",
and
Z(B (4)) = 8(cid:1) 8 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + "".
In all,
Z(B)al ~ 0 = (cid:1)89 + 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 8 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + ....
Finally, adding this to ~o1 Z(B') dal gives
Z(B) = (cid:1)89 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + ~al 3 + (cid:1)89 + la3 + ~al 4 + ax~a2
+ 8(cid:1) 8 ~ + lala3 + 8(cid:1) 9 + "".
352 ROBINSON
The terms of order 4, i.e., Z(B4), are verified by adding the cycle indices of
the automorphism groups of the three non-separable graphs on 4 points,
which are listed in Table 1.
Once Z(B.) is computed, the number of non-separable graphs on n
points is found by summing the coefficients. If the number is all that is
required, it seems that a great deal of effort is expended in computing
extra information. However, there is no way evident to dispense with Z(B)
and work with the ordinary generating function Z(B)ai --* xq. By applying
previously noted extensions of our methods, one can compute ZP,L(B)
in a manner similar to the method of computing Z(B). In this case one
cannot deal with the ordinary generating function
Ze.L(B)ai --* xi; bi --~ yi
alone. However, if only the number of non-separable graphs on a given
number of points and lines is required, one can save some work by dealing
with the mixed generating function
Ze,L(B)a/~ ai; b, -+ yq
instead of Ze.L(B).
Extensive hand calculations have not been carried out, because
Osterweil 8 has programmed our method for the enumeration of blocks
for a computer. His results for graphs on fewer than 10 points are listed
in Table 3.
TABLE 3
The Number of Graphs, Connected Graphs, and
Non-separable Graphs on Fewer Than 10 Points
Points 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Graphs 1 2 4 11 34 156 1044 12346 274668
Connected graphs 1 1 2 6 21 112 853 11117 261080
Non-separable graphs 0 1 1 3 10 56 468 7123 194066
We close the section by pointing out a quick solution of a slightly
different enumeration problem with the methods we have developed.
A bridge of a graph G is a line of G, the deletion of which results in a
disconnected (or empty) graph. A graph is 2-1ine-connected just if it is
connected and has no bridges. It is easy to see that for a connected graph
this is equivalent to having no block isomorphic to/'22 (cid:12)9 Let B* ----- B - {K~};
then
Z(B*) = Z(B) -- (cid:1)89 ~ -- (cid:1)89
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 353
The 2-line-connected graphs are easily enumerated by the methods of
Section 5 or 6 since they are just the connected graphs with blocks in B*.
8. GRAPHS WITHOUT END-POINTS
Let L be the set of graphs every point of which has degree ~ 2. Let M
be the set of connected graphs in L. Let the base of any graph be its
maximal subgraph which is in L; this subgraph is obviously unique since
the union of subgraphs in L is also in L. Moreover, if G is a connected
graph then its base is either empty or connected. For, if A, B are distinct
connected components of the base of G, then some path in G joins a
point of A to a point of B. The union of A, B, and this path is in M. Thus
A and B would be part of the same connected component of the base of G,
which is a contradiction.
We find Z(M) from Z(C) and Z(T) by means of a relation which must
be inverted.
THEOREM 8.
Z(C) = Z(T) § Z(M)alZ(T').
Proof. First, we claim that a connected graph has an empty base just
if it is a tree. For any subgraph of a tree has connected components
which are trees. It was shown in Section 5 that any connected graph
besides/(1 has at least one end-block. In the case of a tree the end-block
is/(2, so the point which is not a cut-point has degree 1. Thus the base of
a tree is empty. Conversely, if a connected graph is not a tree then it
contains some block B with more than two points. It is clear that B ~ M,
since B is non-separable. Thus the base contains B, and is non-empty.
Now it remains to see that Z(the elements of C with non-empty bases)
is just Z(M)alZ(T'). If G is connected and has a non-empty base H,
we correspond G with the configuration which maps each point x of H
to the limb of G at H which contains x and is rooted at x. We have seen
that/-/~ M. Each limb C of G at H must be a tree. For, if not, the base A
of C would be non-empty and the union of A and H would be a proper
supergraph of H which is in L, an impossibility. We must also argue that
any limb of G at H eontains exactly one point of H. In Section 5 we have
seen that a limb of G at H must contain at least one point of H because G
is connected and/-/non-empty. If a limb contains two points of H, then
the path in the limb between the two points along with H gives a proper
supergraph of H which is in L, a contradiction of the fact that H is the
base of G. Finally, it is clear that our correspondence is onto all possible
354 ROBINSON
configurations from an element of M into T', is 1-1, and preserves auto-
morphism groups. Thus (9) gives the desired result.
To invert Theorem 8, notice that an element of C on n + 1 points is
either in M, or else has a base with ~ n points. Thus if M. is the elements
of M on ~ n points and Z(Mn) is known, then the terms of order n § 1 in
Z(C) -- (Z(T) + Z(M.)aaZ(T'))
are the difference Z(M.+,)- Z(M.). For example, suppose we have
determined that
Z(M3) = ~-al3 + 8(cid:1) 9 + (cid:1)89
From Section 5 we have alZ(T' ) = al q- al 2 + "", so
Z(M3)alZ(T') = ~al 3 § }aaa2 -k 8(cid:1) 9 + }al 4 -+- 8(cid:1) 9 -k "".
Also, from Section 5,
Z(T) = al 4- 8(cid:1) 9 z -k 8(cid:1)9 + 8(cid:1) 9 3 + 8(cid:1) 9 + -~al4 + 8(cid:1) 9 + 8(cid:1) 9 2
+ (cid:1)89 + "",
while, from Section 4,
Z(C) = al + (cid:1)89 2 + 8(cid:1) 9 + -~al3 Jr- ala2 -}- la3 At- 19., 4
~_~t~l _J_ 2G12a2
@ la2 2 "q- ~alaa + 8(cid:1) 9 -k "".
Thus
Z(M4) -- Z(Ms) = ~al a -k a~2a2 + 3a~2 -- 8(cid:1) 9 + (cid:1)89
This is verified by adding the cycle indices of the automorphism groups
of the 3 connected graphs on 4 points which do not have end-points, which
are listed in Table I.
There is an alternative enumeration of graphs without end-points by
Owings 10 which proceeds directly from first principles. It is rather
brutal and difficult to apply, however.
Z(L) may be obtained from Z(M) in the same way that Z(H) is obtain-
ed from Z(C) in Section 4. That is,
Z(L) = exp ~- Z(M).
i=1
For a different approach to determining Z(L), let F be the set of forests
(graphs with connected components in T). Then one sees, by applying
co
expE%
i=1 l
ENUMERATION OF NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS 355
to both sides of Theorem 8, that
1 + Z(H) = (1% Z(F))(1 @ Z(L)alZ(T')). (15)
Now (15) is readily inverted to determine Z(L) from Z(H), Z(F), and
Z(T'). In Sections 3 and 5, Z(H) and Z(T) are determined, and
oo
Z(F) = exp Z(T).
-=
It is easy to modify our results so as to include the possibility of points
of degree 0. Let L* be the set of all graphs without end-points, and M*
the connected graphs in L*. It is clear that M* = M w {K1} and L* is
the set of connected graphs the connected components of which are all
in M*. Thus Z(M*): ~-Z(M) and
a I
oo oo a k
Z(D*) : exp ~ ~ a I + Z(M) : Z(L)exp ~,
k----1 /s 2--1 T"
Line parameters are easily introduced into Theorem 8 and relation (15).
In fact,
Ze, z(C) ~- Ze,z(T) + Ze.z(M)alZ(T'); bl
and
1 + Ze, L(H) = (1 + Ze,r(F))(1 + Z~,,L(L)alZ(T'); bll).
9. SOLVED AND UNSOLVED PROBLEMS
The enumeration of k-connected graphs or k-line-connected graphs
remains open for k >~ 3. It seems reasonable to believe, however, that
moderate extensions of our methods will suffice for the case of 3-connected
graphs. The methods of the present paper can be used to enumerate acyclic
digraphs. The closely related problem of enumerating transitive digraphs,
however, seems to be much more difficult and remains open. In the area
of partition restrictions, extensions of our methods suffice to enumerate
homeomorphically irreducible graphs (that is, without points of degree 2),
and also cubic graphs. The enumeration of k-regular graphs for k > 3,
by contrast, seems much less accessible. The results on acyclic digraphs,
homeomorphically irreducible graphs, and cubic graphs will appear
elsewhere.
356 ROBINSON
REFERENCES
1. C. C. CADOGAN,T he MObius Function and Connected Graphs, to appear in J.
Combinatorial Theory.
2. A. CAYLEY, Collected Mathematical Papers, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1889-1897: Vol. 3, pp. 242-246; Vol. 11, pp. 365-367.
3. G. W. FORD, R. Z. NORMAN, AND G. E. UHLENBECK, Combinatorial Problems
in the Theory of Graphs, II, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 42 (1956), 203-208.
4. F. HARARY, The Number of Linear, Directed, Rooted, and Connected Graphs,
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 78 (1955), 445-463.
5. F. HARARY, Graph Theory, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1969.
6. F. HARARY AND G. E. UHLENBECK, On the Number of Husimi Trees, I, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 39 (1953), 315-322.
7. R. Z. NORMAN, On the Number of Linear Graphs with Given Blocks, Dissertation,
University of Michigan, 1954.
8. L. OSTERWEIL, Enumeration of Nonseparable Graphs on Fewer Than 10 Points,
to appear.
9. R. OTTER, The Number of Trees, Ann. of Math. 49 (1948), 583-599.
10. J. C. OWINGS, JR., Combinatorial Methods in Graph Theory, Honors Thesis,
Dartmouth College, 1962.
11. G. POLYA, Kombinatorische Anzahlbestimmungen ffir Gruppen, Graphen, und
chemische Verbindungen, Acta Math. 68 (1937), 145-254.
12. G. PRIMS, On the Automorphism Group of a Tree, Dissertation, University of
Michigan, 1957.
13. J. H. REDFmLD, The Theory of Group Reduced Distributions, Amer. J. Math.
49 (1927), 433-455.
14. R. J. RIDDELL, Contributions to the Theory of Condensation, Dissertation,
University of Michigan, 1951.
15. R. W. ROBINSON, Enumeration of Colored Graphs, J. Combinatorial Theory
4 (1968), 181-190.
16. R. W. ROBINSON, Enumeration of Euler Graphs, Proof Techniques in Graph Theory
(F. Harary, ed.,), Academic Press, New York, 1969.
17. W.T. TtrrrE, Connectivity in Graphs, University of Toronto Press, 1966, Chapter 9.