# 1-s2.0-S2950435X25000526-main

Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomedical Analysis
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/bioana/
The health protection potential of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae in
]]
]]
an aging society ]]]]]]
Yuhan Zhenga,1, Jun Lid,1, Xiaosheng Chenb, Bo Mac,⁎ , Ke Chena,⁎ , Fei Yub,⁎
a The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Department of Spine Surgery, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518020, China
b Department of Spine Surgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518035, China
c Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China
d Department of Vascular Surgery, Shenzhen Luohu Hospital Group Luohu People's Hospital, Guangdong 518000, China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: With the global population aging, degenerative musculoskeletal diseases (DMDs) such as osteoporosis (OP),
Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae(TFRD) osteoarthritis (OA), and sarcopenia (SP) have placed a substantial burden on society. Consequently, there is an
Degenerative musculoskeletal diseases(DMDs) urgent demand for developing corresponding prevention and treatment strategies for these diseases. Rhizoma
Osteoporosis (OP) Drynariae (RD) refers to the dried rhizome of Drynaria fortunei (Kunze) J.Sm. Endowed with abundant resources,
Osteoarthritis (OA)
it exerts therapeutic effects in healing trauma and alleviating pain, tonifying the kidney to strengthen bones, as
Sarcopenia (SP)
well as dispelling pathogenic wind and eliminating macules. Consequently, it serves as a frequently employed
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) in the field of TCM orthopedics and traumatology. Recent phytochemical
studies have identified a variety of compounds in RD, including flavonoids, phenylpropanoids, triterpenoids,
phenolic acids, and steroids, among others. Among these, flavonoids are the primary bioactive components and
have attracted considerable research attention due to their extensive pharmacological activities. Relevant studies
have shown that flavonoids have potential in the clinical application of DMDs. This review systematically in-
tegrates and critically analyzes the latest research progress of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae (TFRD), in
the treatment of DMDs. It also provides a comprehensive overview of the current research status, aiming to
identify promising future research directions for TFRD.
1. Introduction prevent or slow down the progression of the disease. There is no mature
clinical evidence for the drug intervention of SP [6–8]. Consequently,
On a global scale, the intensification of population aging has led to gaining an understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms underlying
growing concerns about age - related diseases. It is documented that these conditions and creating drugs tailored to them holds considerable
aging is a common risk factor for degenerative musculoskeletal dis- importance for healthcare practitioners.
eases. DMDs are caused by structural and functional damage to the Natural medicines are an important source of future drug develop-
musculoskeletal system, including OP, OA, and SP [1]. DMDs are pre- ment. RD is the dried rhizome of Drynaria fortunei (Kunze) J.Sm., which
valent among the elderly and are prone to lead to adverse outcomes, is widely distributed in Southeast Asia and many provinces and cities in
such as falls, fractures, physical disabilities, and mortality [2]. The China, ensuring an adequate supply of drug resources [9]. RD is a
Global Burden of Diseases(GBD), Injuries and Risk Factors Study 2021 commonly used medicinal material in the formula of Traditional Chi-
shows that approximately 1.69 billion people suffer from MSK diseases nese Medicine orthopedics and traumatology. It has the medicinal ef-
worldwide [3]. With the increase in life expectancy and the global fects of tonifying the kidney and strengthening bones, promoting blood
aging of the population, the prevalence of DMDs has surged and is circulation and relieving pain, and reconnecting tendons and bones.
expected to continue to increase in the next 10 years, which will bring a The related active ingredients have various pharmacodynamic effects
heavy burden to the economy and society [4,5]. At present, there are such as promoting the formation of new osteoblasts, anti-osteoporosis,
limited drug options for DMDs in clinical practice. Analgesics are and treating chondrodysplasia [10,11]. In this context, it is necessary to
commonly used drugs for OA, but symptomatic treatment cannot further sort out the active ingredients and medicinal value of RD. TFRD
Peer review under the responsibility of Editorial Office of Biomedical Analysis
⁎ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: cnmabo@126.com(B. Ma), xiao.han79@163.com(K. Chen), yufei89@pku.edu.cn(F. Yu).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioana.2025.11.001
Received 16 July 2025; Received in revised form 9 October 2025; Accepted 10 November 2025
2950-435X/© 2025 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-
ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
Fig. 1. Graphical Abstract.
are the main bioactive components of RD, which have attracted the [12–17]. These components can play anti-OP, anti-inflammatory, an-
attention of researchers due to their extensive pharmacological activ- tioxidant, and other effects [18,19]. Naringin in dihydroflavonoids is
ities. Therefore, this study was conducted to review the chemical the main active substance required to be detected for the identification
components of TFRD and their pharmacological effects and related of RD as specified in the Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of
basic research in the treatment of DMDs. These findings may lay a China [16].
theoretical foundation for their further development and clinical
transformation (Fig. 1). 3. Role and mechanism of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae
This paper collected relevant literature using the online databases of in the management of osteoporosis
PubMed and CNKI. Comprehensive searches were conducted using
keywords such as "Drynariae Rhizoma", "total flavonoids of Rhizoma OP is a systemic skeletal disease. Due to the imbalance of bone re-
Drynariae", "osteoporosis", "osteoarthritis", "Degenerative musculoske- modeling, it can lead to bone mass loss, and then result in a decrease in
letal diseases", etc. Particular attention was paid to the relevant re- bone strength and an increased risk of fractures. The pathogenesis of OP
search progress in the past five years. To ensure the scientific accuracy is complex and involves cellular senescence, estrogen deficiency, gut
of this study, the chemical information related to TFRD was carefully microbiota dysbiosis, and bone immune imbalance [7]. As reported in a
cross-validated through the authoritative chemical information plat- meta-analysis of epidemiological trends in OP, the global prevalence of
form "PubChem". OP is approximately 18.3 %, with a higher prevalence in females
(23.1 %) than in males (11.7 %) [20]. At present, the main prevention
2. Basic information of Rhizoma Drynariae and treatment methods for OP include: lifestyle adjustment, drug
therapy, physical therapy, etc. RD can play an anti - OP role by pro-
According to the "Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China" moting bone formation, inhibiting bone loss, and enhancing bone me-
(2020 Edition), RD is the dried rhizome of Drynaria fortunei (Kunze) chanical properties [21]. Compared with Western medicine treatment
J.Sm., a plant of the Polypodiaceae family. It is usually flat and long plans that have significant adverse reactions, complex contra-
strip-shaped, often curved, and branched. RD tastes bitter, has a warm indications, and high costs for combined and sequential medication, RD
nature, and belongs to the liver and kidney meridians. It has the effects can not only effectively relieve symptoms and improve bone mineral
of treating injuries and relieving pain, tonifying the kidney and density, but also only cause mild adverse reactions such as nausea,
strengthening the bones; and externally, it can dispel wind and remove constipation, and dry mouth, which are easy to handle and do not affect
freckles. Modern chemical research has identified a variety of com- subsequent medication. At the same time, it has the advantages of re-
pounds in RD, including TFRD, triterpenoids, phenylpropanoids, phe- liable safety, no obvious contraindications, and low cost [22]. Among
nolic acids, steroids, etc [12]. Among them, the wide range of phar- them, TFRD has now been developed into a listed proprietary Chinese
macological activities exhibited by TFRD make it the main active medicine and is recommended for the prevention and treatment of OP
ingredient responsible for the therapeutic effect of RD, and it is con- and related bone diseases [7,23]. In recent years, the experimental re-
sidered a key factor influencing the pharmacological activity of RD [9]. search on TFRD in the treatment of OP has been increasing day by day,
TFRD can be further divided into dihydroflavonoids, flavanols, flavo- providing an important basis for the development and clinical appli-
nols, and other types of flavonoids and related glycosides (Table 1) cation of TFRD.
141
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
Table 1
The main ingredient of TFRD (The molecular structure is derived from the chemical information platform "PubChem".).
142
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
Fig. 2. Role and mechanism of TFRD in the management of osteoporosis.
In basic research, TFRD has been proven to prevent and treat OP by Zhao et al. extracted Rhizoma Drynariae-derived nano-vesicles
acting on multiple signaling pathways and cytokines (Fig. 2). Jin et al. (RDNVs) from fresh RD root juice, and they found that RDNVs pro-
evaluated the effects of TFRD on osteoporotic rats and osteocytes. They moted the expression of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) and
found that these flavonoids increased the vitality of osteocyte-like cells runt-associated transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) in human bone marrow
and mitigated OP without obvious hepatotoxicity or nephrotoxicity mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) by targeting and activating the es-
[24]. Fang et al. confirmed that TFRD activated the BMP2/Smad sig- trogen receptor α (ERα) signaling pathway, thereby promoting the
naling pathway and maintained bone metabolism balance in diabetic osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs. An in-depth analysis revealed
model rats by promoting bone formation and inhibiting bone resorp- that Naringin in RDNVs was a key active component for RDNVs to
tion, thus improving diabetic osteoporosis (DOP) [25]. Su et al. corro- target ERα to exert osteogenic effects [33]. Zhou et al. pointed out that
borated that TFRD promoted the differentiation of bone marrow me- the bone protective actions of herbal medicine RD were mainly medi-
senchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) to osteoblasts (up-regulation of ated by flavonoid phytoestrogens via estrogen receptors, and at the
RUNX2 and BMP-2) and inhibited their differentiation to adipocytes same time, RD has tissue-selective estrogenic activity. It demonstrates
(down-regulation of PPAR-γ and C/EBPα) through the MAPK/HIF-1α the capacity to selectively function as an estrogen agonist in bone and
signaling pathway. These modifications contributed to improving bone brain tissues to confer protective effects, while acting as an antagonist
microstructure, enhancing bone density, and inhibiting fat accumula- in reproductive organs—thereby circumventing the reproductive-re-
tion, thus highlighting the important therapeutic potential of TFRD in lated adverse effects associated with conventional hormone replace-
primary OP. Moreover, the dose-dependent efficacy of TFRD has been ment therapy (HRT). In particular, when combined with tamoxifen, RD
validated in some animal models [26]. Among the flavonoid extracts of has no significant drug conflict, demonstrating its great clinical appli-
RD, Naringin is considered a promising bone health protection in- cation potential in the treatment of postmenopausal OP and other re-
gredient due to its prominent effect on inhibiting bone resorption and lated menopausal symptoms in females [34].
the absence of obvious hepatotoxicity or nephrotoxicity [27]. Studies Lin et al. proposed that RD was effective in the treatment of OP by
have shown that Naringin in Dendrolimus can enhance the osteogenic regulating gut microbiota and improving bone metabolism. These re-
differentiation ability of metanephric mesenchymal cells (MMCs) sults provided a new perspective on the mediated treatment of OP by
through the p38 signaling pathway [28]. Li et al. proved that Sophor- RD. In addition, RD may regulate intestinal microbiota through
aflavanone G in RD improved OP by targeting the MAPK/NF-κB sig- the CMP-legionaminate biosynthesis Ⅰ pathway to maintain bone
naling pathway, inhibiting osteoclast differentiation and maturation, metabolism balance. Lactobacillus, Ruminococcaceae_UCG-007,
and reducing bone loss [29]. Peptococcaceae_unclassified, and Ruminiclostridium may be potential
It has been reported that the combined therapy based on TFRD is therapeutic targets [35]. Li et al. further demonstrated that TFRD al-
more effective in promoting osteogenesis and inhibiting bone breakage leviated ovariectomy (OVX)-induced OP by changing the community
compared with the monotherapy of TFRD. For example, Jiang et al. makeup and abundance of gut microbiota, as well as adjusting meta-
found that the combination of TFRD and metformin (Met) played an bolites and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Gut microbiota, particularly
anti-OP role in vitro by regulating the SOST/Wnt/β-catenin signaling Akkermansia muciniphila and its associated metabolites, might have a
pathway and the OPG/RANKL/RANK axis, exhibiting a more significant key part in OP treatment based on TFRD, which needs to be further
effect than TFRD alone [30].TFRD can also bind to calcium carbonate to verified in subsequent experiments [36].
increase bone mineral content and reduce bone loss by modulating the In terms of clinical research, a meta - analysis shows that TFRD, the
Wnt3a/β-catenin pathway and reducing the production of reactive main active ingredient of RD, has an adjuvant therapeutic effect in im-
oxygen species, thereby enhancing the anti-OP effect [31,32]. These proving patients' symptoms and femoral bone mineral density. The adverse
research results indicate that TFRD has great potential in the develop- reactions include constipation, dry mouth, nausea, and gastrointestinal
ment of combination therapies. However, the clinical safety and effi- reactions. These reactions are alleviated after symptomatic treatment, and
cacy of TFRD still need to be further verified. there is no need to stop the drug, indicating good safety [37].
143
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
These findings have established a robust theoretical basis for the man- the main diseases that may lead to disability and premature loss of work
agement of OP predicated on TFRD. In particular, the improvement of OP [38]. The pathogenesis of OA involves many complex factors, such as
by RD through the regulation of gut microbiota shows important research genetics, biomechanics, metabolic changes of articular cartilage, and
value. At present, the basic research of scholars mainly focuses on popular inflammatory response [39]. According to some studies based on GBD
mechanisms. Research on mechanisms such as the IHH signaling pathway data, the economic burden of OA patients worldwide is also gradually
and glutamate pathway is relatively scarce. Scholars can expand the increasing with the aging of global populations, and its incidence and
breadth of research beyond longitudinal studies of popular mechanisms, prevalence are still on the rise [40]. The treatment of OA is primarily
search for new pathways and new factors that play a role, and open up new structured around basic treatment, pharmacotherapy, and surgical
horizons for the research on preventing and treating OP with TFRD. At treatment. Among various therapeutic agents, oral Non-Steroidal Anti-
present, TFRD has been developed into Qianggu Capsule (Drug Approval Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) have become the most widely used first-
Number: Z20030007, manufactured by Qi-Huang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., line drugs in clinical practice due to their ability to effectively inhibit
Beijing, China) for the clinical treatment of osteoporosis. Although studies inflammatory responses and alleviate pain. However, NSAIDs exhibit a
have shown that TFRD has a certain effect in increasing bone mineral ceiling effect—excessive use does not enhance therapeutic efficacy but
density and can be used as an intervention measure in clinical practice, we may increase the risk of adverse drug reactions and toxic effects [41].
have not retrieved any research on the pharmacokinetics and bioavail- Therefore, the development of new therapeutic regimens for OA has
ability of TFRD. In the future, well-designed, high-quality trials are still important clinical and social significance. At present, the emerging
needed to verify this. Traditional Chinese medicine has the characteristics pharmacological strategies for OA mainly focus on inhibiting cartilage
of multi - pathway and multi - target. However, the complexity of reg- decomposition, promoting cartilage repair, reducing bone resorption of
ulating multiple pathways simultaneously may also lead to unpredictable the subchondral bone, and intensifying anti-inflammation effects [42].
off-target effects or side effects, which requires further exploration on our RD, a traditional Chinese medicinal agent used in treating bone injuries,
part. In addition, the exploration of combining TFRD with other substances has been gaining increasing attention in the management of OA.
may provide more theoretical support for the clinical application of tar- Some clinical studies have shown that TFRD is beneficial for the treat-
geted treatment of OP. For example, nanotechnology can improve the ef- ment of OA. Zhou et al. found that after 12 weeks of oral administration of
ficiency of drug delivery, providing new strategies for the efficient and safe TFRD, the symptoms of osteoarthritis were effectively controlled, the joint
prevention and/or treatment of OP. Most of the RD extracts included in the mobility function was significantly improved, and the decrease in the levels
research still belong to mixed components. In the future, it is necessary to of IL-1β and PGE in the serum might be one of the action pathways of the
further extract precise and effective components and find the exact targets drug [43]. Wang et al. innovatively proposed the treatment of knee os-
for preventing and treating OP, which is crucial for the development of new teoarthritis with floating needles combined with Qianggu Capsules. By
clinical drugs. The clinical application of TFRD in preventing and treating leveraging the synergistic effect of biological factors and bioelectric signals,
OP is undoubtedly promising in an aging society. However, the mechan- they adjusted the unbalanced tendon and bone state of the knee joint,
isms of occurrence and prevention and treatment methods of adverse re- achieving a good therapeutic effect [44]. Zhang used TFRD combined with
actions such as gastrointestinal reactions, dry mouth, and constipation still glucosamine sulfate to treat OA and found that it significantly improved the
need to be clarified. More high - quality clinical studies are still needed to curative effect compared with using them alone, and it has high safety [45].
narrow the gap between the traditional use of TFRD and its evidence - However, the specific mechanism by which TFRD affects OA has not been
based modern medical use. elucidated and requires further exploration by us to provide more theore-
tical basis for the clinical application of TFRD.
4. Role and mechanism of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae In terms of basic research, certain achievements have been made at
in the management of osteoarthritis present (Fig. 3). Chen et al. reported that TFRD effectively inhibited the
activation of the NF-κB and PI3K/AKT pathways, down-regulated the
As a serious chronic disease characterized by cellular stress and expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in articular chon-
extracellular matrix degradation, OA is caused by joint dysfunction drocytes in OA rat models, and up-regulated the expression of Tissue
resulting from the abnormal metabolism of joint tissue. It is also one of Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-4 (TIMP-4). These modifications restored
Fig. 3. Mechanism of TFRD reducing articular cartilage damage in OA models.
144
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
the balance between MMPs and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases low muscle strength, reduced muscle mass and/or quality, and dimin-
(TIMPs) in OA models, thereby significantly reducing articular cartilage ished physical function. SP is particularly prevalent in the elderly po-
damage in OA models. Besides, they demonstrated that TFRD down- pulation [54]. Several molecular mechanisms have been reported as
regulated COX-2 expression in chondrocytes by activating the AMPK contributors to SP, including dysregulation of hormonal functions such
signaling pathway and suppressing the NF-κB pathway. This, in turn, as IGF-1 and insulin, impaired differentiation and proliferative poten-
inhibited the downstream arachidonic acid metabolic pathway, which tial of muscle satellite cells, and dysfunction in inflammatory pathways
was identified as the key mechanism underlying TFRD's role in treating [55]. According to different diagnostic criteria, the overall prevalence
OA [46,47]. Some studies have validated that Naringin, an important of SP ranges from 10 % to 27 % worldwide. More specifically, the
active component of TFRD, can protect IL-1β-induced degenerative prevalence of severe geriatric SP is about 2–9 %; the prevalence of SP
chondrocytes and promote the proliferation of chondrocytes in rabbits. among individuals aged < 60 years is 8–36 %, while that among in-
The mechanism may be related to the inhibition of the caveolin- dividuals aged ≥ 60 years is 10–27 % [56]. Patients with SP, regardless
p38MAPK signaling pathway [48]. Ye et al. combined oral Naringin with of diagnostic criteria, have a low quality of life and a significantly in-
implantation of acellular dermal matrix, and they found that this com- creased risk of falls, fractures, and death [57]. At present, SP is mainly
bination could repair cartilage defects in the rabbit knee with better ef- treated by resistance strength training and high-quality protein sup-
fects than oral Naringin alone. Through further analysis, they found that plementation, and there is no targeted drug for this disease [58]. Al-
this repair effect was related to the activation of the TGF-β/ALK5/ though the effectiveness of resistance training and nutritional support
Smad2/3 signaling pathway induced by Naringin, which promoted the has been recognized, these therapies are not feasible for patients with
high expression of TGF-β 2, TGF-β 3, and Sox-9 at the cartilage defect. SP under some circumstances, especially for the frail and sickly elderly
These changes promoted the proliferation, differentiation, development, [59]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new drugs to mitigate SP,
and extracellular matrix synthesis of chondrocytes, ultimately improving enhancing patients' quality of life, and relieve the burden on the med-
articular cartilage quality and joint structure [49]. This finding provides ical system and society [60].
a novel insight for combining drugs and materials for the treatment of Yin and co-workers demonstrated a positive association between
OA, but more evidence is needed to support its clinical application. Pan blood lipid ratios and SP in middle-aged adults, implying a potential
et al. first found that naringenin (NAR) reduced iron overload-induced connection between blood lipids and SP where inflammatory bio-
osteoarthritis (IOOA). For one thing, NAR eliminates accumulated re- markers exert a substantial mediating effect [61]. Some studies have
active oxygen species (ROS) by virtue of its antioxidant activity; for demonstrated that the hypertrophy, proliferation, and activation of
another, it strengthens the antioxidant capacity of chondrocytes via the adipocytes in obesity can lead to insulin resistance and lipid toxicity in
NRF2-HO-1 signaling pathway. The experimental results also indicated skeletal muscle. Insulin resistance can interfere with the effective use of
that NAR can reduce iron accumulation, which may contribute to the glucose by muscles to accelerate the breakdown of protein and muscle,
development of new drugs for the treatment of IOOA. However, its acting thereby impairing muscle function and promoting the occurrence and
mechanism still needs to be further studied [50]. A study based on net- development of SP [62,63]. Lu et al. found that RD increased the bone
work pharmacology and experimental verification indicates that luteolin mineral density (BMD) in OP patients ，it also improved blood lipid
is the most crucial component in the treatment of OA by RD. Its me- levels in patients by modulating Notch1-NLRP3 inflammasomes [64].
chanism of action is closely related to its inhibitory effect on the ex- Bonnet et al. proposed that the muscle strength and insulin sensitivity
pression of interleukin - 6 (IL - 6) through the PI3K/AKT/NF - κB of humans were improved by inhibiting RANKL, exhibiting the poten-
pathway [51]. In summary, TFRD can improve OA by regulating in- tial for SP treatment [65]. Furthermore, some experiments have shown
flammation, promoting cartilage repair, and resisting oxidative stress. that TFRD can significantly reduce the RANKL/OPG ratio [66]. These
In future research, researchers can focus on the synergistic me- studies demonstrate that TFRD has the potential to ameliorate SP by
chanism of different components of TFRD in the OA microenvironment alleviating obesity. However, it is still necessary to further investigate
and clarify the cross - regulatory network of the AMPK/NF - κB, NF - κB the underlying mechanism involving the "blood lipid-obesity-SP" re-
and PI3K/AKT pathways. At the same time, regulating the complexity lationship.
of numerous pathways may also lead to unpredictable off - target effects Some inflammatory cytokines are linearly associated with muscle
or side effects, which need our attention. Focusing on luteolin in TFRD health [67], suggesting an external link between inflammation and SP.
is undoubtedly more valuable. The treatment of OA by luteolin through As the first and most studied "myokine", IL-6 is produced in large
the PI3K/AKT/NF - κB pathway has been verified in in vitro experi- quantities by skeletal muscle during exercise [68]. On the one hand, IL-
ments, and these results should be further verified in in vivo experi- 6 is an important cytokine for skeletal muscle to exert motor function
ments. The breadth of research can also be expanded to find new action and improve exercise endurance [69]; on the other hand, chronic in-
pathways of luteolin, providing a new basis for its clinical application. flammation is an important determinant of SP, and elevated IL-6 and
Besides, focusing on the gut microbiota could represent a promising tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) can have adverse effects on the phy-
therapeutic approach for managing OA [52]. Currently, whether TFRD siological function of muscle [59]. Therefore, reducing the harmful
can regulate the OA-related intestinal flora has not been clarified suf- impacts of pro-inflammatory cytokines could represent a therapeutic
ficiently. In the future, metagenomic and metabolomic analyses can be approach for SP. Zhao et al. reported for the first time that TFRD exerts
used to further reveal the acting mechanism of TFRD, thus enhancing anti-inflammatory effects through suppression of MAPK signaling
the comprehension of OA pathogenesis and providing a new direction pathway activation triggered by proinflammatory cytokines, including
for RD-based drug development. It has been demonstrated that joint interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and TNF-α [70]. The above findings indicate
traction, an emerging therapy for OA, can repair the joint by restoring that, by virtue of its anti-inflammatory properties, TFRD could serve as
the normal joint environment. Hence, it may be feasible to establish a preventive and/or therapeutic agent for SP, and future studies can
therapeutic regimens based on the combination of TFRD components focus on the anti-inflammatory mechanism of TFRD and the main
and joint traction, thus providing more effective innovative strategies components acting on muscle cells or tissues.
for delaying the progression of OA and improving joint function [53]. The decreased estrogen level during menopause is an important
cause of decreased muscle mass and muscle strength [71]. Dam et al.
5. Role and mechanism of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae observed that percutaneous estrogen therapy enhanced muscle mass
in the management of sarcopenia and grip strength in early menopausal women following 12 weeks of
resistance training [72]. Through gene knockout methods, Seko et al.
The pathogenesis of SP lies in the cumulative adverse muscular confirmed that the estrogen-ERβ pathway constitutes a sex-specific
changes over an individual's lifetime. This disease is characterized by regulatory mechanism, exerting a significant role in muscle growth and
145
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the potential mechanism of TFRD in preventing and/or treating sarcopenia.
regeneration in female mice [73]. Some studies have shown that fla- the prevention and/or treatment of DMDs still need to be further
vonoid can exert tissue-selective estrogenic effects in ovariectomized evaluated. Besides, the specific mechanism of TFRD in the management
rats [34]. At present, there are relatively few studies on the improve- of these diseases has not been fully clarified due to some pending
ment of SP by TFRD through estrogen replacement. Despite these problems. For example, it is also necessary to identify whether TFRD
controversies, targeting estrogen receptors by TFRD-related chemical can play an osteogenic role by activating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling
components as pharmaceutical HRT may also be a new strategy for the pathway while accelerating the progression of malignant tumors [75].
treatment of postmenopausal SP [74]. In terms of clinical application research, there is no unified conclusion
Overall, obesity, changes in estrogen levels, and inflammation are on the safe dose that can achieve the best efficacy of TFRD. Clarifying
closely related to SP, and TFRD has the potential to prevent and/or this difficult problem is of great significance for long - term and high -
treat SP by improving blood lipid levels and exerting estrogen-like ef- dose clinical applications.
fects and anti-inflammatory effects (Fig. 4). However, there are rela- Against the backdrop of global population aging, TFRD provide a
tively few studies on the treatment of SP with TFRD, and hence more new possibility for the treatment of DMDs. With the continuous im-
basic and clinical studies are needed to provide more direct evidence. In provement of the Quality Standard System of Natural Materials and the
the future, it will be necessary to further elucidate the specific mole- deep integration of modern science and technology, the immense re-
cular mechanism by which TFRD alleviates SP, particularly the "blood servoir of natural substances is expected to improve the health and
lipid-obesity-SP" association. Furthermore, it is also required to in- well-being of all mankind.
vestigate the pathways related to blood lipid regulation by TFRD in the
treatment of SP and the mechanisms by which THE active components Author contributions
of TFRD regulate inflammatory signaling pathways to exert anti-in-
flammatory effects. The isolation and characterization of TFRD's active Yuhan Zheng and Jun Li analyzed the data and wrote the manu-
components that alleviate SP could facilitate the development of tar- script. Fei Yu, Ke Chen, Ma Bo, Chen Xiaosheng revised the manuscript.
geted pharmaceuticals. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
6. Summary and outlook
CRediT authorship contribution statement
As a traditional medicine commonly used in the Department of
Orthopedics and Traumatology of Traditional Chinese Medicine, RD Yuhan Zheng: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
shows the synergistic therapeutic potential involving multiple compo- Formal analysis, Data curation. Jun Li: Writing – original draft, Data
nents and multiple targets in the treatment of DMDs. However, as a curation. Chen Xiaosheng: Writing – review & editing. Ma Bo: Writing
natural product, its chemical characteristics, including the concentra- – review & editing. Ke Chen: Writing – review & editing. Fei Yu:
tion of TFRD, may vary greatly depending on growth conditions, har- Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Funding acquisition.
vest time, and processing methods. There is still a lack of discussion on
standardization: how to ensure consistent, effective, and safe products. Statement of ethics
This is something that requires our attention on the way for it to de-
velop into a modern medicine. For the development of future drugs, the None.
selection of the extraction scheme for the active ingredients of RD and
the setting of relevant parameters are closely related to the quality and Funding
efficiency of compound extraction. Exploring more efficient extraction
methods is also the direction we need to strive for. Its main active This research was supported by grants from Sanming Project of
components, total flavonoids and flavonoids such as naringin, play an Medicine in Shenzhen (No. SZSM202211003)，Shenzhen Key Medical
important role in alleviating OP, OA, and SP by regulating various Discipline Construction Fund（No. SZXK022），Guangdong Province
signaling pathways. However, the safety and effectiveness of TFRD in Medical Science and Technology Research Foundation Project (No.
146
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
B2025518), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation [18] Zhou Qun, Zeng Xian, Dan Huang, et al., Research progress on the chemical com-
(No. 2022A1515220111), and Shenzhen Second People’s Hospital position and biological activity of Drynariae Rhizoma, Mod. Tradit. Chin. Med.
Mater. Med. World Sci. Technol. 23 (8) (2021) 2727–2741.
Clinical Research Fund of Shenzhen High-level Hospital Construction
[19] Shun-Qing Chen, Wei Liang, Xue-Mei Zhang, et al., Research progress on chemical
Project (No. 20253357002). compositions and pharmacological action of Drynariae Rhizoma, China J. Chin.
Mater. Med. 46 (11) (2021) 2737–2745, https://doi.org/10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.
20210222.602.
Data availability
[20] N. Salari, H. Ghasemi, L. Mohammadi, et al., The global prevalence of osteoporosis
in the world: a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Orthop.
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were gen- Surg. Res. 16 (2021) 609, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-021-02772-0.
[21] Han Feiyu, Cao Yujing, Lin Zihan, et al., Action mechanism and clinical research
erated or analyzed during the current study.
progress of Gusuibu (Rhizoma Drynariae) fighting against osteoporosis, Acta Chin.
Med. 40 (4) (2025) 812–819, https://doi.org/10.16368/j.issn.1674-8999.2025.04.
Declaration of Competing Interest 131.
[22] Liu Bo, Ding Longlong, Chen Zhijian, et al., The mechanism of rhizoma drynariae
and its active components in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, Chin. J.
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
Osteoporos. 30 (10) (2024) 1540–1547.
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ- [23] Y. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Shen, et al., Total flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae
ence the work reported in this paper. (Gusuibu) for treating osteoporotic fractures: implication in clinical practice, Drug
Des. Dev. Ther. 11 (2017) 1881–1890, https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S139804.
[24] H. Jin, N. Jiang, W. Xu, et al., Effect of flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae on
Acknowledgments osteoporosis rats and osteocytes, Biomed. Pharmacother. 153 (2022) 113379,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113379.
[25] X.H. Fang, G.E. Zhou, N. Lin, Total flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae (Gusuibu)
We would like to thank all research staff for their thorough and alleviates diabetic osteoporosis by activating BMP2/smad signaling pathway,
helpful suggestions during the revision of the article. Comb. Chem. High. Throughput Screen. 26 (13) (2023) 2401–2409, https://doi.
org/10.2174/1386207326666230223165730.
[26] H. Su, L. Liu, Z. Yan, et al., Therapeutic potential of total flavonoids of Rhizoma
References
Drynariae: inhibiting adipogenesis and promoting osteogenesis via MAPK/HIF-1α
pathway in primary osteoporosis, J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 20 (2025) 260, https://doi.
[1] Z.Q. Wen, J. Lin, W.Q. Xie, et al., Insights into the underlying pathogenesis and org/10.1186/s13018-025-05665-8.
therapeutic potential of endoplasmic reticulum stress in degenerative musculoske- [27] H. Jin, N. Jiang, W. Xu, et al., Effect of flavonoids from Rhizoma Drynariae on os-
letal diseases, Mil. Med. Res. 10 (2023) 54, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-023- teoporosis rats and osteocytes, Biomed. Pharmacother. 153 (2022) 113379, https://
00485-5. doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113379.
[2] M. Nunes-Pinto, R.G. Bandeira De Mello, M.N. Pinto, et al., Sarcopenia and the [28] P.Cheng Ji, Y.Sheng Xie, W.Kai Guo, et al., p38 signaling mediates naringin-induced
biological determinants of aging: a narrative review from a geroscience perspective, osteogenic differentiation of porcine metanephric mesenchymal cells, Chin. J.
Ageing Res. Rev. 103 (2025) 102587, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102587. Integr. Med. 30 (9) (2024) 818–825, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11655-024-3761-1.
[3] A.J. Ferrari, D.F. Santomauro, A. Aali, et al., Global incidence, prevalence, years [29] X. Li, W. Deng, K. Tang, et al., Sophoraflavanone G inhibits RANKL-induced os-
lived with disability (YLDs), disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs), and healthy life teoclastogenesis via MAPK/NF-κB signaling pathway, Mol. Biotechnol. 67 (5)
expectancy (HALE) for 371 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories and (2025) 2085–2097, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12033-024-01185-8.
811 subnational locations, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden [30] N. Jiang, H. Jin, K. Yang, et al., The mechanism of metformin combined with total
of Disease Study 2021, Lancet 403 (10440) (2024) 2133–2161, https://doi.org/10. flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae on ovariectomy-induced osteoporotic rats, Biomed.
1016/S0140-6736(24)00757-8. Pharmacother. 165 (2023) 115181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.
[4] P. Yin, Y. Jiang, X. Fang, et al., Cell-based therapies for degenerative musculoske- 115181.
letal diseases, Adv. Sci. 10 (21) (2023) 2207050, https://doi.org/10.1002/advs. [31] P. Mu, Y. Hu, X. Ma, et al., Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae combined with
202207050. calcium attenuate osteoporosis by reducing reactive oxygen species generation,
[5] J.J. Yang, S.Q. He, B. Huang, et al., A bibliometric and visualized analysis of extra- Exp. Ther. Med. 21 (6) (2021) 618, https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.10050.
cellular vesicles in degenerative musculoskeletal diseases (from 2006 to 2024), Front. [32] Y. Hu, P. Mu, X. Ma, et al., Rhizoma drynariae total flavonoids combined with
Pharmacol. 16 (2025) 1550208, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2025.1550208. calcium carbonate ameliorates bone loss in experimentally induced Osteoporosis in
[6] Yijiao Lou, Ansu Wang, Yan Ma, et al., Interpretation of consensus for sarcopenia rats via the regulation of Wnt3a/β-catenin pathway, J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 16 (2021)
and research status quo, Chin. Gen. Pract. Nurs. 19 (30) (2021) 4196–4200. 702, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-021-02842-3.
[7] Chinese Society Of Osteoporosis And Bone Mineral Research, Zhenlin Zhang, [33] Q. Zhao, J. Feng, F. Liu, et al., Rhizoma Drynariae-derived nanovesicles reverse
Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of primary osteoporosis(2022), Chin. osteoporosis by potentiating osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow
Gen. Pract. 26 (14) (2023) 1671–1691. mesenchymal stem cells via targeting ERα signaling, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 14 (5)
[8] Bo Wang, Nansheng Yu, Consensus of four-stepladder program of knee osteoar- (2024) 2210–2227, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2024.02.005.
thritis (2018), Chin. J. Jt. Surg. (Electron. Ed. ) 13 (1) (2019) 124–130. [34] L. Zhou, K.Y. Wong, C.C.W. Poon, et al., Water extract of Rhizoma Drynaria se-
[9] G. Jingying, L. Yonghong, F. Huawei, et al., A comprehensive review of Drynariae lectively exerts estrogenic activities in ovariectomized rats and estrogen receptor-
rhizoma: botany, traditional applications, and active flavonoid components, J. positive cells, Front. Endocrinol. 13 (2022) 817146, https://doi.org/10.3389/
Pharm. Pharmacol. (2025) rgaf050, https://doi.org/10.1093/jpp/rgaf050. fendo.2022.817146.
[10] Qiao Deng Qiang, Li Xiaowan, Zhongfeng, et al., Research progress of Gusuibu [35] Q. Lin, X. Ouyang, Q. Pan, et al., Extracts of Drynariae Rhizoma promote bone
(Drynariae Rhizoma)and its active ingredients in the treatment of skeletal system formation in OVX Rats through modulating the gut microbiota, Planta Med. 91 (3)
diseases, J. Liaoning Univ. Tradit. 24 (7) (2022) 1–5, https://doi.org/10.13194/j. (2025) 127–141, https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2462-4844.
issn.1673-842x.2022.07.001. [36] Q. Li, X. Wu, X. Niu, et al., Integrated metagenomic and metabolomic analyses of
[11] Yang Xiang Congcong, Yu Meng, Qiaoling, et al., Research progress on Drynariae the effects of total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae on reducing ovariectomized-
Rhizoma, South China Agric. 18 (15) (2024) 90–95, https://doi.org/10.19415/j. induced osteoporosis by regulating gut microbiota and related metabolites, PLOS
cnki.1673-890x.2024.15.019. ONE 20 (2) (2025) e0317832, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0317832.
[12] Zhiyan Zhang, Ziyu Pu, Mingtao Zhang, et al., Research progress on chemical [37] Qingying Wang, Yili Zhang, Yanming Xie, Meta analysis of total flavonoids from
constituents and pharmacological effects of chinese medicine Drynaria Fortunei, J. Rhizoma Drynariae (Gusuibu) in treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Chin.
Nanjing Univ. Tradit. (8) (2025) 1114–1126, https://doi.org/10.14148/j.issn.1672- J. Osteoporos. 25 (04) (2019) 465–471, https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1006-7108.
0482.2025.1114. 2019.04.008.
[13] Y.Hong Liang, M. Ye, W.Zhi Yang, et al., Flavan-3-ols from the rhizomes of Drynaria [38] S. Tang, C. Zhang, W.M. Oo, et al., Osteoarthritis, Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 11 (1) (2025)
fortunei, Phytochemistry 72 (14) (2011) 1876–1882, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 10, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-025-00594-6.
phytochem.2011.05.011. [39] R.F. Loeser, J.A. Collins, B.O. Diekman, Ageing and the pathogenesis of osteoar-
[14] Zhou Qun, Zeng Xian, Dan Huang, et al., Research progress on the chemical com- thritis, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 12 (7) (2016) 412–420, https://doi.org/10.1038/
position and biological activity of Drynariae Rhizoma, Mod. Tradit. Chin. Med. nrrheum.2016.65.
Mater. Med. World Sci. Technol. 23 (8) (2021) 2727–2741. [40] F. Cao, Z. Xu, X.X. Li, et al., Trends and cross-country inequalities in the global
[15] Shun-Qing Chen, Wei Liang, Xue-Mei Zhang, et al., Research progress on chemical burden of osteoarthritis, 1990–2019: a population-based study, Ageing Res. Rev. 99
compositions and pharmacological action of Drynariae Rhizoma, China J. Chin. (2024) 102382, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102382.
Mater. Med. 46 (11) (2021) 2737–2745, https://doi.org/10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm. [41] Yu. Nansheng Wang Bo, Consensus of four-stepladder program of knee osteoar-
20210222.602. thritis (2018), Chin. J. Jt. Surg. (Electron. Ed. ) 13 (1) (2019) 124–130.
[16] Yu Xiang, Yu Xiang, Zhang Peng, et al., Research progress on the clinical efficacy [42] A. Latourte, M. Kloppenburg, P. Richette, Emerging pharmaceutical therapies for
mechanism of total flavonoids of rhizoma drynariae in the treatment of osteoporotic osteoarthritis, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 16 (12) (2020) 673–688, https://doi.org/10.
fracture, Chin. J. Osteoporos. 31 (1) (2025) 149–156. 1038/s41584-020-00518-6.
[17] G. Jingying, L. Yonghong, F. Huawei, et al., A comprehensive review of Drynariae [43] Chen Zhou Rongkui, Li. He Changhong, Clinical observation of oral osteopractic
rhizoma: botany, traditional applications, and active flavonoid components, J. total flavonoids in the patients with knee osteoarthritis, China Med. Her. 8 (2)
Pharm. Pharmacol. (2025) rgaf050, https://doi.org/10.1093/jpp/rgaf050. (2011) 2, https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1673-7210.2011.02.036.
147
Y. Zheng, J. Li, X. Chen et al. Biomedical Analysis 2 (2025) 140–148
[44] Yuehui Wang, Hui Cheng, Yu Bai, A clinical study on treating 80 cases of knee [60] L. Larsson, H. Degens, M. Li, et al., Sarcopenia: aging-related loss of muscle mass
osteoarthritis by floating acupuncture plus the Qianggu capsule, Clin. J. Chin. Med. and function, Physiol. Rev. 99 (1) (2019) 427–511, https://doi.org/10.1152/
8 (21) (2016) 2, https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1674-7860.2016.21.050. physrev.00061.2017.
[45] Jinhu ZhanG, Effects of total flavonoids of rhizome drynariae combined with glu- [61] X. Yin, H. Song, H. Chen, et al., Association between lipid ratios and sarcopenia and
cosamine sulfate on symptoms and bone metabolism and inflammatory factors in the mediating roles of inflammatory biomarkers in a cross-sectional study from
patients with knee osteoarthritis, Chin. J. Osteoporos. 24 (7) (2018) 4, https://doi. NHANES 2011–2018, Sci. Rep. 15 (1) (2025) 6617, https://doi.org/10.1038/
org/10.3969/j.issn.1006-7108.2018.07.008. s41598-025-90131-y.
[46] G.Y. Chen, J.Q. Chen, X.Y. Liu, et al., Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae restore [62] A. Kalinkovich, G. Livshits, Sarcopenic obesity or obese sarcopenia: a cross talk
the MMP/TIMP balance in models of osteoarthritis by inhibiting the activation of between age-associated adipose tissue and skeletal muscle inflammation as a main
the NF-κB and PI3K/AKT pathways, Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. eCAM mechanism of the pathogenesis, Ageing Res. Rev. 35 (2017) 200–221, https://doi.
2021 (2021) 6634837, https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6634837. org/10.1016/j.arr.2016.09.008.
[47] G.Y. Chen, X.Y. Liu, X.E. Yan, et al., Total flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae treat [63] A. Beilerli, V. Kudriashov, A. Sufianov, et al., Regulation and mechanism of action
osteoarthritis by inhibiting arachidonic acid metabolites through AMPK/NFκB of miRNAs on insulin resistance in skeletal muscles, Noncoding RNA Res. 8 (2)
pathway, J. Inflamm. Res. 16 (2023) 4123–4140, https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR. (2023) 218–223, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncrna.2023.02.005.
S418345. [64] L. Lu, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, et al., Drynaria fortunei improves lipid profiles of elderly
[48] You-Xin Su, Hu Yan, Bao-Jun Chen, Effect of naringin of Drynaria Rhizome, a patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis via regulation of Notch1-NLRP3 inflamma-
Chinese Medical Component of Zhuanggu Jianxi Recipe Containing Serum on some-mediated inflammation, Gynecol. Endocrinol. Off. J. Int. Soc. Gynecol. Endocrinol.
Caveolin-p38MAPK signal pathway in IL-1β induced rabbit degenerated chon- 38 (2) (2022) 176–180, https://doi.org/10.1080/09513590.2021.2015760.
drocytes, Chin. J. Integr. Tradit. West. Med. (2014) DOI:CNKI:SUN:ZZXJ.0.2014- [65] N. Bonnet, L. Bourgoin, E. Biver, et al., RANKL inhibition improves muscle strength
12-024.. and insulin sensitivity and restores bone mass, J. Clin. Investig. 129 (8) (2019)
[49] C. Ye, J. Chen, Y. Qu, et al., Naringin in the repair of knee cartilage injury via the 3214–3223, https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI125915.
TGF-β/ALK5/Smad2/3 signal transduction pathway combined with an acellular [66] N. Jiang, H. Jin, K. Yang, et al., The mechanism of metformin combined with total
dermal matrix, J. Orthop. Transl. 32 (2022) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jot. flavonoids of Rhizoma Drynariae on ovariectomy-induced osteoporotic rats, Biomed.
2021.06.004. Pharmacother. 165 (2023) 115181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.115181.
[50] Z. Pan, Q. He, J. Zeng, et al., Naringenin protects against iron overload-induced [67] J. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, et al., The association between eight complete blood
osteoarthritis by suppressing oxidative stress, Phytomedicine 105 (2022) 154330, count-derived inflammatory markers and muscle health, Front. Nutr. 12 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2022.154330. 1498757, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2025.1498757.
[51] Chen G. Yao, Liu X. Yu, Chen J. Qi, et al., Prediction of Rhizoma Drynariae targets [68] B.K. Pedersen, M.A. Febbraio, Muscle as an endocrine organ: focus on muscle-de-
in the treatment of osteoarthritis based on network pharmacology and experimental rived interleukin-6, Physiol. Rev. 88 (4) (2008) 1379–1406, https://doi.org/10.
verification, Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. eCAM 2021 (2021) 5233462, 1152/physrev.90100.2007.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5233462. [69] Fäldt J, I. Wernstedt, S.M. Fitzgerald, et al., Reduced exercise endurance in inter-
[52] C.G. Boer, D. Radjabzadeh, C. Medina-Gomez, et al., Intestinal microbiome com- leukin-6-deficient mice, Endocrinology 145 (6) (2004) 2680–2686, https://doi.org/
position and its relation to joint pain and inflammation, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 10.1210/en.2003-1319.
4881, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12873-4. [70] K. Zhao, M. Chen, T. Liu, et al., Rhizoma drynariae total flavonoids inhibit the
[53] M.P. Jansen, S.C. Mastbergen, Joint distraction for osteoarthritis: clinical evidence inflammatory response and matrix degeneration via MAPK pathway in a rat de-
and molecular mechanisms, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 18 (1) (2022) 35–46, https://doi. generative cervical intervertebral disc model], Biomed. Pharmacother. =
org/10.1038/s41584-021-00695-y. Biomedecine Pharmacother. 138 (2021) 111466, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
[54] A.J. Cruz-Jentoft, G. Bahat, J. Bauer, et al., Sarcopenia: revised European consensus biopha.2021.111466.
on definition and diagnosis, Age Ageing 48 (1) (2019) 16–31, https://doi.org/10. [71] Menopause and sarcopenia: a potential role for sex hormones, Maturitas 68 (4)
1093/ageing/afy169. (2011) 331–336, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.01.014.
[55] P. Wiedmer, T. Jung, J.P. Castro, et al., Sarcopenia – Molecular mechanisms and [72] T.V. Dam, L.B. Dalgaard, S. Ringgaard, et al., Transdermal estrogen therapy im-
open questions, Ageing Res. Rev. 65 (2021) 101200, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr. proves gains in skeletal muscle mass after 12 weeks of resistance training in early
2020.101200. postmenopausal women, Front. Physiol. 11 (2020) 596130, https://doi.org/10.
[56] F. Petermann-Rocha, V. Balntzi, S.R. Gray, et al., Global prevalence of sarcopenia 3389/fphys.2020.596130.
and severe sarcopenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Cachex.. [73] D. Seko, R. Fujita, Y. Kitajima, et al., Estrogen receptor β controls muscle growth
Sarcopenia Muscle 13 (1) (2022) 86–99, https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.12783. and regeneration in young female mice, Stem Cell Rep. 15 (3) (2020) 577–586,
[57] J. Xu, C.S. Wan, K. Ktoris, et al., Sarcopenia is associated with mortality in adults: a https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.07.017.
systematic review and meta-analysis, Gerontology 68 (4) (2022) 361–376, https:// [74] T. Mitoma, J. Maki, H. Ooba, et al., Protocol for a randomised, placebo-controlled,
doi.org/10.1159/000517099. double-blinded clinical trial on the effect of oestrogen replacement on physical
[58] E. Dent, J.E. Morley, A.J. Cruz-Jentoft, et al., International clinical practice performance to muscle resistance exercise for older women with osteoarthritis of
guidelines for sarcopenia (ICFSR): screening, diagnosis and management, J. Nutr. knee joint: the EPOK trial, BMC Geriatr. 23 (1) (2023) 104, https://doi.org/10.
Health Aging 22 (10) (2018) 1148–1161, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12603-018- 1186/s12877-023-03828-y.
1139-9. [75] S. Li, H. Zhou, C. Hu, et al., Total flavonoids of rhizoma drynariae promotes dif-
[59] Y. Rolland, C. Dray, B. Vellas, et al., Current and investigational medications for the ferentiation of osteoblasts and growth of bone graft in induced membrane partly by
treatment of sarcopenia, Metabolism 149 (2023) 155597, https://doi.org/10.1016/ activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, Front. Pharmacol. 12 (2021) 675470,
j.metabol.2023.155597. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2021.675470.
148