JOURNAL OF COMBINATORIAL THEORY 9,  327--356  (1970)

Enumeration of Non-Separable Graphs*

ROBERT  W .   ROBINSON

University  of California,  Berkeley,  California 94720

Communicated  by Frank Harary

Received  March  1,  1968

ABSTRACT

Non-separable  graphs  are  enumerated,  and  also  graphs  without  end-points.
The  basic  enumeration  tool  is  sums  of  cycle  indices  of  automorphism  groups.

1.  PRELIMINARIES

For  elementary  definitions  and  information  on  graphs  see  Harary  5.
The graphs  with  which  we  deal  have  no  loops  or  multiple  edges,  nor  any
labeling  of  their  points  or  lines.  Sections  2,  3,  and  4  develop  counting
methods  in  which  sums  of cycle indices  of automorphism  groups  are  the
medium of enumeration.  These methods generalize results in which content
generating functions are the medium  of enumeration.  In  particular P61ya's
Haupsatz  11,  p.  163
is  generalized,  along  with  its  applications  to  the
enumeration  of graphs  and  connected  graphs  in  Harary  4.  Historically,
Redfield's  decomposition  theorem  13,  p.  445  was  the  first  step  in  the
direction  of using  sums  of cycle indices  of automorphism  groups  in  com-
binatorial  enumeration.  Graphs  with  given  blocks  are  enumerated  in
Section  5,  and  in  Section  6  this  result  is  recast  to  generalize  an  earlier
solution  of  this  problem  by  R.  Z.  Norman.  In  Section  7  non-separable
(2-connected)  graphs  are  enumerated,  along  with  graphs  which  are
2-line-connected  as  a  corollary.  In  Section  8  graphs  without  end-points
(points  of  degree  1)  are  enumerated.  We  close  with  some  solved  and
unsolved  problems.

The  statement  that  one  has  "enumerated"  some  set  of  graphs  raises
a  point  which  should  be  self-evident  but  is  sometimes  missed.  There  is
always  a  brute  force procedure for finding out how many  graphs  there are
with  a  given  number  of  points  and  other  specified  properties,  such  as

* Much  of  the  material  of  this  paper  is  contained  in  the  author's  honors  thesis,
entitled  "Methods  of  Enumeration  in  G r a p h   Theory,"  Dartmouth  College,  1963,
supervised  by  Professor  Robert  Z.  Norman.

327

328

ROBINSON

number  of lines,  connectivity, colorability, symmetry, etc.  This  is  because
there  are  a  finite  number  of  isomorphism  types  of  graphs  on  a  given
number  of  points,  representatives  of  which  can  be  examined  in  a  finite,
effective way,  and  the  ones  with  the  requisite  properties  totaled  up.  Such
a  procedure  is  bound  to  be  inefficient and  unpleasing,  as  well  as  contri-
buting  no  insight  into  the  structure  of  graphs.  A  good  solution  to  an
enumeration  problem  should,  by  contrast,  be  pleasing  and  efficient in
practice;  this  is  rarely  accomplished  without  providing  some  insight  into
the  structure  of  graphs.  A  quick  method  for  finding  a  number  without
dealing  directly  with  graphs  at  all  offers  the  delight  of  "something  for
nothing."  Necessarily,  the  solution  does  not  provide  any  new  algorithm
for  constructing  representatives  of  the  graphs  involved,  except  for  what
may  be  suggested  indirectly  by  structure  theorems  involved  in  the  proof
of the  solution.

2.  BAsIc  GROUP THEORY

Let  O  be  any  set  of  "objects,"  and  15  any  finite  group  represented  as
permutations on O. Notationally, a permutation on O in the representation
of  15  is  not  distinguished  from  the  element  of  15  which  it  represents.
A  type X for 15 and  0  is a  map

x  : ((g,  o)  ~15  x  0

l g(o)  =  o)  -~  R,

where R  is any commutative ring  over the rational  numbers, and such that

x ( f - l g f ,  f-l(o))  =  x(g,  o)

for allfi  g  ~ 15 and  o e  O  with g(o)  =  o.

Let  3(0)  ----- {g ~ 15   g(o)  ----- o},  and  T(g)  -~  {o E 0  I g(o)  =  o),  for  all

o ~  O  and  g  E 15.  Let

z g . ~ ( o ) )   =

J ~(o)l  ~<o~

1

E  x(g, o);

here      denotes cardinality.  We  think  of .~(o) as  the  automorphism  group
of  O.  It  is  clear  that  3(0)  ----g-l.~(g(o))g  for  every  g  + 15  and  o e  O.
Hence  Zx(~(o))=  Zx(~(g(o))),
in  view  of  the  conjugacy  condition
satisfied  by  X-

Consider  o l ,   o2 e  O  to  be (~-equivalent iff there is  some g ~ 15 such that
g(ox)  ---- o3 (cid:12)9 This is an equivalence relation; denote by E t h e   set of 15-equiv-

ENUMERATION  OF  NON-SEPARABLE  GRAPHS

329

alence  classes  of  O.  If  ~ ~ E,  we  take  Zx(~ )  =  Zx(,~(o))  for  any  o ~ ~.
Now if o ~  a  ~ E, then

I~

I  -

I.~(o)1

'

the  left  cosets  of  3(0)  being  in  an  obvious  1-1  correspondence  with  the
objects  which  are  ffi-equivalent to  o.  Hence  we  have

Z~(a)  =  J - ~   o~  13(o)1  Zx(5(o)).

(1)

The right-hand  side of (1) is, by definition, just

1
I~l  (cid:127)

Z  x(g,o);

o~o  g ~ ( o )

now  summing  over  all  a  ~ E  and  reversing  the  summations  on  the  right
yields

E  Z~(a)  =
o~

1

I ~  t  y'  E

g~ff)  oET(9)

x(g,  o).

(2)

It is interesting to note that  Redfield's decomposition theorem  13,  p.  445
is an application  of (2).

Suppose  now  that  R  =  Qal,

a2,  a3 .... ,  where  Q

is  the  ring  of

rational numbers.  In case O is finite, a type ~: of interest is given by

~(g,  o)  =  I-I a~ 'g'"),

q~

where  v(g,  n)  is  the  number  of  cycles  of  length  n  in  the  disjoint  cycle
decomposition  of g.  ~: is  usually  called  the  cycle  type.  T o   establish  that  ~:
satisfies  the  conjugacy  condition,  note  that,  if (ol .... , ok)  is  a  cycle  of g,
then  (f-a(O1),...,f-l(ok))  is  a  cycle  of  f-lgfi  Thus  v(g,  n)  =  v(f-agfi  n)
for all n.

Since  the  object  does  not  figure  in  the  definition  of  ~,  we  can  define

~(g)  =  $(g,  o)  and

1
ze(~)  -  I (~ I ~  ~(g)"

Ze(~ )  is  called  the  cycle  index  of  6i,  and  is  usually  written  just  Z(6i).
Notice  that  the  sum  o f  the  coefficients  in  Z(ff))  is  always  1,  and  that  any
monomial  I-Ii a~ (i) which  appears  with  a  non-zero  coefficient in  Z(ff~) has
the property that

  O

:  ~  ia(i).

t

330

ROBINSON

If ffi is  the  automorphism  group  of a  graph  G represented  as  permuta-
tions  on  the  set  of points  of G,  then  Ze((5)  is  abbreviated  to  Z(G).  If o is
a  point  of G, then 3(0)  is the  automorphism group  of the  graph  obtained
from  G  by  rooting  o  (that  is,  giving  o  the  special  status  of  "root-point"
and  requiring  that  the  root-point  be  preserved  in  isomorphisms  and
automorphisms). Denote by G'  the set of  non-isomorphic  rooted  graphs
obtained from  G, and let

Z(G') =  Z  Z(H).

H E G "

Do not include the root-point  in the object set of the automorphism  group  of
any H  ~ G'. Then in view of (2) we have

z ( G ' )   =

1
- -   ~  zK-%~))
a l   treE

i

--

al  I~I ~  ~' ~(g)

geff)  o~T(g)

1

al  I o  I  v,z_., v(g,  1)  {:(g)

oe(5

O

  Oa I  Ze({~).

-

-

In our fully abbreviated notation,

THEOREM  1.

Z ( G ' ) = o - ~ Z ( G ) .

C

C

B

C

C

C

FIGURE  1

ENUMERATION  OF  NON-SEPARABLE  GRAPHS

331

Theorem  1 was  first proved by Norman  7,  p.  33  and  appears  in  Ford,
Norman,  and  Uhlenbeck  3,  equation  (8).  In  illustration  of the  theorem,
let  G be  the  graph  in  Figure  1.  There are  3 (5-equivalence classes  (usually
called  orbits  in  this  case),  which  we  call  A,  B,  and  C,  In  Figure  1  each
point  of G  is  labeled  according  to  its  (5-equivalence class.  Then  Z(G')  =
Z(GA)  +  Z(GB)  +  Z(Gc),  where  Ga is obtained from G by rooting a point
in A,  etc. Thus  we see that

Z(GA)  =  ~gal 9 @ ~aalTa2 4-  -~6alSa22 +  ~-~alSa23 4-  ~a13a2a4 4-  ~ala24

4-  ~ala~2a4 4-  la38  4-  ~aaa6,

Z(GB)  =  ~ a l   9 4-  -~aalTa2 +  l~-~alSa22 4-  ~aa13a23 +  ~alaa2a4 +  ~ala24

4-  (cid:1)89

,

Z ( G c )   =

la19  4-  la17ae  n t-  lalSa22  4-  lalaa~ a +  lal3aeaa,

and  finally

Z(G')  =  {~al 9 4-  (cid:1)89

4-  ~alSa~ 2 4-  ~-~2a13a2 n 4-  (cid:1)89

4-  lala2 ~

4-  lalaz2a~  4-  ~aa a 4-  ~aaa~.

On  the  other  hand,

Z(G)  =  -~eal ~ 4-  ,aa18az  4-  -~aa16az ~ 4-  -~ga14a~ 3  4-  ~a~aa~a~ -q- ~alZa2 ~

@  1..1  2,.-~ 211

8"1 ~  '~  4-  ~alaa z 4-  ~alaaa~.

Now  Theorem  1 is  easily verified for this  example.

3.  BASIC  COMBINATORIAL  PRINCIPLE

Let  B  be  a  finite  set,  A  any  set,  S  any  commutative  ring  over  Q,  and

t : A

(cid:141)  B---~ S. Then

l-I  t(r(b), b)  =  1-  ~
b~B  a~A

"r~A B  b~B

t(a,  b),

(3)

provided  that  the  summations  are  well  defined.  This  is  a  direct  result  of
the  distributive  law  in  S.

Now  suppose  that  D  is  a  finite  set,  N  is  the  set  of  natural  numbers,
Fis  a finite or denumerable set, and r  : F  (cid:141)  N  -~ S is such that Z q ~   r(q, n)
is well defined for each n  ~ N. In addition let the group (5 be represented as
permutations  on  D.  Then (5  has  a  natural  representation  as  permutations
on  F D  by  the  rule

g(v)(d)  =  v(g-l(d)),

5821914-2

332

ROBINSON

for  any  g  E 15,  .,7 ~ F D,  and  d ~ D.  For  any  g  E 15  let  cyc(g)  be  the  set  of
disjoint  cycles  of which  g  (as  a  permutation  on  D)  is  the  product.  Now
g(~)  =  ~/  if and  only if ~/  is constant  on each cycle of g;  that is, viewing g
as  a  permutation  on  F D,  T(g)  =  F cycle). This  justifies  the  notation  ~/(~)
in  case ), ~ cyc(g) and g(~/) =  ~/.

A  type X for 15 and F D is given by

x(g,  r/)  =

I

r(7/(y), lh(7))

for any g  e  15 and  ~/~  T(g),  where  lh(y) is  the  "length"  (cardinality)  of y.
To  verify  that  X  satisfies
the  conjugacy  condition,  note  first  that
f - i ( ~ )   ~ cyc(f-lgf)  just  if y  E cyc(g),  as  was  seen  in  Section  2.  Then  if f,
g  ~ 15 and  ~  ~ T(g)  we have

x ( f - l g f ,   f - l ( ~ ) )   =

I-
~eye(l-lgy)

r(f-107)(3), lh(~))

=

I-

r(f-(~l)(f-l(r)),

lh(/-l(Y)))

=

I-I

r(~(~,),  lh(r))

=  x(g,  ~/) as  required.

In  the  usual  parlance  of Pdlya's  counting  theorem,  D  is  the  "domain,"
F  the "figure set,"  and F D the set of "configurations." Let config be the  set
of N-equivalence classes  of F D. Then,  by (2),

Z
a~conflg

zx

1

)-o  E  E

0 ~   ~ T ( 9 )

x(g, n)

1

9~(~ ,EF eye(g) V~CyC(O)

by definition; then, by (3),

--  ~

Z
I
g~l~i v~eye(ff)  q~F

Z  r(q, lh(~,)).

If  X  e R  and  h  : N  --~ S  then  we  write  Xa~  --+ h(i)  for  the  image  of  X
under  the  homomorphism  of  R  into  S  which  preserves  Q  and  takes  as
to h(i) for each i ~ N.  In this notation

Z
a~onflg

Z~(o)  =  Z(15)  a~  ~  Z  r(q, i).

(4)

q~F

E N U M E R A T I O N   O F   N o N - S E P A R A B L E   G R A P H S

333

Now  suppose  that  Dx ..... D~  are  subsets  of  D  which  are  unions  of
orbits  of 15;  that  is,  for  each  1  ~< k  ~< m  and  g  e  15,  g  permutes  the  ele-
ments  of Dk among  themselves.  Usually the  sets D~ are  mutually disjoint,
but  that  is  not  necessary.  Assume  also  that,  for  each  1  ~< k  ~< m  and
each n  ~ N,  there is  a  (distinct) indeterminant  ak.n in S.  Then  a  generaliza-
tion  ~(D~ .... , D~)  of the  cycle type is given by the rule

~(D~ ..... D ) ( g )   =

f i   1-I a~(.~ "k''~)
k ~ l   n

for all g  ~ 15, where v(g,  k,  n) is the number  of cycles of length n which are
in Dk in the disjoint cycle decomposition of g.  The generalized cycle index
Ze(D~ ..... D~)(15) is abbreviated ZD~ ..... D~(15). Generalized cycle indices were
introduced  by  P61ya  11,  p.  174  and  are  essential  in  Robinson  15.
In  general,  when  m  ---- 2,  a~.~ and  a2.~ are  replaced  by  a~  and  b~,  respec-
tively.

Once  subsets  of the  domain  are  distinguished,  it  is  natural  to  consider
corresponding  figure  sets  F~ ,..., F ~ ,   and  take  config  to  be  the  set  of
15-equivalence classes  of

FDxl X  Fy2  X  ...  X  T~ ,~.

The  map  r  is  then  replaced  by  a  sequence  of maps  r,  : F~  (cid:141)  N  ~  R  for
all  1  ~  k  <~ m,  and  the type X is now determined by the rule

x(g,  ~?) =

fi
k = l   v~Cyefg).rSD k

l-I

rk(~7(y),  lh(~)).

Then,  in  much the  same  way that  (4)  is  proved,  one  can  show that

Zx(~)  =  ZD1 ..... 0,~(15) a~.~---~  ~  rk(q,  n).

(5)

a~conflg

q~f~

To  apply  (5)  to  the  enumeration  of  graphs,  consider  the  symmetric
group  ~  on the  set P  of n  points.  Let L  be the set  o f  two  element subsets
of  P;  then  ~,,  has  a  natural  representation  as  permutations  on  L.  The
generalized  cycle  index  Ze, L(~,~)  and  its  computation  are  discussed  in
Robinson  15,  pp.  182-3.  Let  Hn  denote  the  set  of  (non-isomorphic)
graphs  on n  points,  and  H  the  set of all graphs.  In  general, if X  _C H  then
we  write  Z(X)  for the  sum  Zc~x Z(G).  We  find Z(I-In)  by making  a  corre,
spondence  between  the  graphs  on  n  points  and  the  ~-equivalence  classes
of configurations from P  and L into Fp  =  {0} and FL  =  {0,  1}, respectively.
Since Fe has  only one element, the points  are unrestricted;  each point pair,

334

ROBINSON

however,  is  sent  either  to  0  (in  case  they  are  non-adjacent  in  the  corre-
sponding  graph)  or  to  1  (in  case  they  are  adjacent  in  the  corresponding
graph).  An  appropriate  choice of re  and  rz  is  rp(0, i)  =  ai  and  rL(0, i)  =
rL(1, i)  =  1 for  all  i E N.  If  ~7, ~ are  any  configurations  and  A,  B  are  the
corresponding  graphs,  then  A  and  B  are  isomorphic just  if  ~  and  ~  are
~-equivalent.  Moreover Z~(I(~)))  =  Z(A).  Thus  (5)  gives  us

THEOREM 2.

Z(Hn)  =  Z e , L ( ~ ) a ,

--+ a~; bi  --~ 2.

Z(H)  is  determined  by  Z(H)  =  5Z,~N Z(H.).  The  empty  graph  K 0  is
treated  as  a  separate  case.  By  definition  Z ( K o ) =   1.  For  the  sake  of
completeness we note that

Z(~.)  =  Z

I
l ~ i 4 n

a~'
V i t   ivi

(6)

and

Zp.L(~n)  =  E

r

v i
ar

.  v~

i - 1
b~(2 )+-T~,+~,,

1~ vivj(i'j)
.
v,,~

(7)

I~
l ~ i < j ~ n

The  summations  in  (6)  and  (7)  are  over  all  n-tuples  (v 1 .....  v,)  of non-

negative integers such that

n  =

~

i v i .

Relation  (6)  is  well  known  and  relation  (7)  has  been justified  by  Harary
4,  equation  (10)  and  Robinson  16.

For  illustration take  n  =  4.  The  11  non-isomorphic  graphs  on 4  points
appear  in  Figure  2,  and  the  cycle  indices  of  their  automorphism  groups
are given in Table  1. These  sum to

Sa4 1  +  4a12a2 -k  2a~ 2 -k  ~ala3  -~- a4,

which  is  also  the  value  of Z(H4)  obtained  from  Theorem  2.
A  somewhat finer result than  Theorem 2 for each n ~ N  is

Ze, L(Hn)  :  Z e , r ( ~ ) a i

--+ ai;  bi  --+  1  -k  b~.

Of  course  Zp, L(H)  =  Z~=I Ze,L(Hn).  The  proof  is  similar  to  that  of
Theorem  2  except  that  rz  is  replaced  by  rL*,  where  rz*(0, i ) =   1  and
rL*(1,i)  :  bi  for all  i E N.  This just  has  the  effect of introducing  a  factor
of b~ for every line cycle of length i in the cycle index of the automorphism

ENUMERATION  OF  NON-SEPARABLE  G R A P H S

3 3 5

2

5

8

3

6

9

I0

II

FIGURE  2

T A B L E   1

P r o p e r t i e s   o f   t h e   G r a p h s   o n   4  P o i n t s

Z(G)

C o n n e c t e d

N o n -
s e p a r a b l e

H a s   a n
e n d - p o i n t

~ a l   a..  +

~a14  +  1  ~
la14  +  1  2

la2~  +

(cid:1)89

+

(cid:1)88

(cid:1)88  2

l a l a   __  1

~a~  a2  +
2
~ a l   a2

~al 4 +  ~a~Saz +  ~az ~ +  ~a,
(cid:1)89  4  +

-~a2a 2

(cid:1)89

~a14  +  1  2
~a~  a2  +
~al 4 +  ~all  ~a2 +  1alas
~al"  +  kalea~ +  ~az ~ +  ka,
(cid:1)89  4 +  (cid:1)89
~ a l  ~  +  1  2
~ a l   +
1  4

+
~a12a~  ~a2 2 +

~ a l   a~  +  ~az 2

l ala3

+

~a~

n o

n o

n o

n o

yes

n o

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

n o

n o

n o

n o

n o

n o

n o

y e s

n o

yes

yes

n o

yes

yes

yes

yes

n o

yes

n o

yes

n o

n o

G

1
2

3

4
5

6
7
8
9
I 0
11

336

ROBINSON

group  of  the  graph  which  corresponds  to  each  configuration.  To justify
the  notation  Ze,L(H),  view  the  automorphism  group  o f   any  graph  as
acting  on  its  points  P  and  its  lines L. For instance,  let K~ be the  complete
graph on n points and K~ its complement, the discrete graph. Then we have
by  definition  Z p , L ( ~ n )   =  ZI,,L(Kn) and  Z ( ~ )

=  Zp,L(Kn).

Recall  that,  in  Z(H),  a  term  I-L a~  must  correspond  to  a  graph  on
3"4 iv~ points.  Thus,  Z(H)a~  ~  xq  is  an  old-style generating  function  for
graphs;  the coefficient of x" is the number  of graphs  on n  points.  Similarly

Ze.i~(H)ai  ~  xi; bi  ~  yl

is  a  generating  function  in  which  the  coefficient of xmy j  is  the  number  of
graphs  on  m  points  which have  exactly j  lines.

4.  BASIC COUNTING THEOREM

First  we  need  a  generalization  of the  composition  of two  permutation
groups  (also  called  the  krantz  or  wreath  product),  and  a  formula  for  its
cycle index.  Suppose that the finite group {5 is represented as permutations
on  the  finite  set D,  and  that  D1 ,...,  Dm is  a  partition  of D  into  unions  of
orbits  of  (5.  Given  finite  groups  91 ..... 9,~  represented  as  permutations
on  the  finite  sets  E 1 ..... Era,  respectively,  the  generalized  composition
ffi91  .....  9m  is a  group  of permutations  on

~)D~  (cid:141)  E~

which is in a  natural  correspondence with

15

(cid:141)

1

(cid:141)

. . .

(cid:141)

I f g   e 15 and  r~ ~ 9 ~  (cid:12)9 for all  1  ~<k  ~< m, then the corresponding permuta-
tion  (g,  T 1 .....  ~'m)  in  15191 .....  9m
is  determined  by  the  r u l e : i f
(d, u) e  D~  (cid:141)  E~., then

( g,  "gl . . . . .

-r,,)(d,  u)  =  ( g(cO,  "r~(d)(u)).

Intuitively,  15191 .....  9,~  acts  on  copies  of  sets  Ek  for  1  ~< k  ~< m,  one
for  each  element  of  D.  The  entire  copies  of  the  sets  E ,   are  permuted
according  to  the  action  of  15,  and  the  elements  of  each  copy  of  Ek  are
permuted  independently according to  the  action  of 9~  (cid:12)9

The  composition  theorem  of P61ya  11,  p.  180  generalizes  to

Z(l~i91  ..... 9m)  =  ZD1 ..... D,,(qi)ae.i  ~  Z(gk)aa  ~  aij.

(8)

ENUMERATION OF  NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS

337

The right-hand  side of (8) is abbreviated

Z ,  1 ..... ,m(15)Z(~l)  .....  Z ( ~ ) .

Pdlya's  proof for his  composition theorem  can  be  adapted  to  proving (8);
this involves using  a  generalization of his counting  theorem  11,  p.  174  in
place of the ordinary version  11,  p.  163.

Now  let us  return  to the  situation  of Section 3.  That  is, we have  a  finite
group  15  represented  as  permutations  on  a  finite  set  D,  and  a  set  F  of
figures.  Suppose  in  addition  that  each  element  Q  E F  is  a  finite  set,  with
an  associated  group  ~(Q)  of  permutations  on  Q.  Think  of  ~(Q)  as  the
automorphism  group  of  Q.  We  assume  that,  for  every j  ~ N,  I Q    ~< j
for  only  finitely  many  Q e F.  This  insures  that  ~ . o ~ F Z ( ~ ( Q ) )
is  well
defined. Now let

r(Q,  n)  =  Z(.~(Q))al

--~  ain

for all  n ~ N  and  Q ~ F,  and  let X be  defined from  r  as  in  Section  3.  Take
the  range  of  ~  is
a  typical  configuration  ~ ~ F  ~  and  suppose
{Q1 .....  Qm}. Successively applying  definitions  and  then  (8),  we  have

that

1

Zx('~(0)  --  I ~(~)l  ~

1-I

r(~(7), lh(7))

g~(~) "/eCyC(g)

1
-I~(~)1  Z

I-

ge~(~) ~cyc(g)

Z(.~(~(7)))a,--+aah(.,)

=  Z~_,(o p ..... ~_,to,~)(~(O)Z(.~(Q1))  .....  z(.~(Q,~))

=  Z(-~(~)~(Q1)  .....  ~(Qm)).

Let  the  group  ~(~)~(Q1),-..,  ~(Q~)  be  called  ~e~t(~).  What  we  have
seen  is  that  Z(~ext(~))  =  Z~(-~(~7)) for  any  ~7 ~ FD-  Then  put  Z(crexO  =
(~ext(~/))  for  all  ~  e  ~r.
Z~(a)  for  any  cr E config;  evidently  Z(aex0  =
Now (4) applies,  to give

Z  ~-

E
a~config

Z ( ~

Z(15)a  n  ~

~,,  Z(~(Q))~j-->  aSn.
O E F

(9)

The right-hand  side of (9) is abbreviated

Relation  (9)  is  a  generalization  of  Polya's  Haupsatz  ll,  p.  153
in
the  case  of figure-counting  series  in  one  variable.  Its  usefulness  to  graph
theory is in  applications where D  is the point set o f  a  graph,  the automor-
phism group  of which is 15; F  is a  set of graphs;  ~(Q)  is the automorphism

338

ROBINSON

group  of  Q  for  each  Q e F;  and  -~ext(V) is  the  automorphism  group  of a
graph which corresponds to 7. It is convenient to think of {(d, q) l d e  D  and
q e  ~7(d)}, the  object  set  of  -3ext(~),  as  consisting  of  copies  of  sets  in  F
which  are  related  to  D  by  7.  Then  -3ext(~)) allows  these  copies  to  be  per-
muted  among themselves by ~(~),  that  is, by any permutation  of 15 on  D
leaving  ,/fixed.  ~ext(~)) also  allows  the  elements  of  each  copy  of a  set  Q
in  the  range  of  ~7 to  be  permuted  according  to  the  action  of  ~(Q),  the
automorphism group  of Q. In  fact -~ext(V) is generated by those permuta-
tions.

Let  C  be  the  set  of connected  graphs.  With  the  help  of (9),  Z(C) will
be  determined  from  Z(H).  For  each  n e  N  let  H(n) be  the  set  of  graphs
which  have  exactly  n  connected  components.  Consider  G e  H(n)  and
: {1 ..... n} --~ C  to  correspond  just  if  each  connected  component  of  G
occurs an equal number of times in G and in the range of ~. This establishes
a  1-1  correspondence  between  H(~) and  classes  of  configurations  from
{1,...,  n} into  C  under  the  equivalence  relation induced  by  the  symmetric
group  ~n  on  {1,...,  n}.  Moreover,  if  G  and  ~  are  equivalent,  then  the
automorphism group  of G acting  on its points  is permutationally isomor-
phic  to  -3ext(~) if we  associate  with  each  graph  in  C  (now  the  figure  set)
its automorphism group as a graph.  Thus, by (9)

Summing over all n ~ N  and  using the  well-known identity

Z(H(.))  =  Z ( ~ . ) Z ( C ) .

1 +

Z ( ~ )   =  exp

--k-'

n ~ l

k = l

we  obtain

1 @ Z(H)  =  exp  ~  a~ Z(C).

(10)

o o

Relation  (10)  is  a  direct  generalization  of equation  (33)  of Harary  4,
which was first observed by Riddell 14.  We can now invert (10), foUowing
an idea of Cadogan 1

for using the MSbius function/~. First

/z(i)
a____ A  log(1  +  Z(H))  =
i

i=1

i=1

i

/~(~) a~---A   ~  -k- Z(C)
Eke1
~  aik / ( C )
W

~ ( i )

~=i

=

i = l

m = l

=  z ( c ) ,

i i m

E N U M E R A T I O N   OF  N O N - S E P A R A B L E   G R A P H S

339

the latter since

Using  the  identity

we have

THEOREM  3.

~0
~l,,, ~ / ~ ( i ) ~ -   II

if  m  >  1.
if  m  =  1.

log(1  -1- Z(H))

=

(--1)5+1
.
J

Z
~=1

Z(H)~,

pt(i)  ~  (--1) j+l

z(c)  =  ~  --7-  y"
j = l
i=1

"
J

a?Z(It).

From Theorem 2 we have

Z(H)  =  al  +  al ~ +  a2  +  ~al 3 -t-  2alaz  -}-  w  +  ~al 4 -t-  4a12a2

+  2a~ 2 +  kala3  +  a~  +  ""

through the terms of order 4.  For the remainder  of the paper we adopt the
convention  that,  whenever  some  terms  of  Z(X)  for  some  X  _C H  are
presented followed by dots,  they consist exactly of the terms  of order  ~< k
for some k  e  N.  From Theorem 3, then, we find

Z(C)  =  al  +  (cid:1)89  ~ +  (cid:1)89  +  ~al 3 +  ala2  +  (cid:1)89  +  19,  4

x~-i  2r- 2alZa~

+  (cid:1)88  z  -t-  ~alaa  +  (cid:1)89  +  " " .

This  result  is  readily  verified in  the  terms  of  order  4  by  adding  the  cycle
indices  of the  automorphism  groups  of the  connected graphs  on  4  points,
which  are listed in  Table  1.

By taking  advantage  of the  exponentiation,  (10)  can  be  inverted  more
easily  than  by  a  direct  application  of  Theorem  3.  Let  Ci  be  the  set  of
connected graphs  on j  points,  and  H ~) the  set  o f  graphs,  every connected
component  of  which  has  at  least j  points.  Then  H m  =  H,  the  terms  of
order j  in  Z(H (j)) give just  Z(Ci),  and  from (10)  we have

1  -1- Z(H Ij+l))  =  (1  +  Z(H(J))) exp

- ~ - -
- a ~

z ( c j ) .

k = l

0o

Thus  Z(Cj)  is  determined  inductively  for  each j,  and  of  course  Z(C)  =
~2~=1 Z(C~).  This  method  of inversion  is  also  very efficient in  the  case  of
ordinary generating functions.

340

ROBINSON

Theorem 3 is easily generalized to include  line cycle parameters.  In  fact,

e o

rx~

Zp L ( C ) =   ~

/_t(i) ~

'

i~1 ~

(--1) ~+~
j

a/Zp.L(H),

where  Ze.r(H)

stands  for

ai  ~  Ze,z(H)aj  --~ ai~; b~ -+  bit.

The proof is  similar to  that  of Theorem 3,  but it involves generalizing the
idea of the composition of permutation groups even further, as in Robinson
15,
and  calling  on  a  formula  for its  cycle index.  A  formula  for Z e . z ( H )
is  mentioned  at  the  end  of  Section  3.  As  before,

Z(C)ai  ~  x i

and

Ze.L(C)ai

--~  xi;  bi  ~  yi

are  old-style  generating  functions  for  C,  with  the  number  of points  and
the  number  of  points  and  lines  as  enumeration  parameters,  respectively.

5.  GRAPHS  WITH  GIVEN  BLOCKS

Recall that a graph is connected just  if it contains a  path joining any two
points  and  is  non-empty.  A  cut-point  is  a  point  of a  graph  the  deletion  of
which leaves a  disconnected graph.  A  non-separable,  or 2-connected,  graph
is  a  connected graph  with  no  cut-points.  A  block  of a  graph  is  a  maximal
non-separable  subgraph.  The  one-point  graph  K 1 is  always  treated  as  a
special case;  K1 is connected but not 2-connected, and  contains  no blocks.
In every other connected graph it is easy to see that every point is contained
in  some  block.

Some  of the  considerations  which follow concerning the  decomposition
of a  graph  into  blocks  may  be  found  in  Tutte  17.  To  a  great  extent  we
have  supplied  our  own  arguments  for  the  sake  of completeness  and  con-
tinuity.

Let  D  be  a  set  of non-separable  graphs,  and  K  the  set  of all  connected
graphs  the  blocks  of which  are  all  in  D.  Our  object  is  to  find  Z(K)  from
Z(D).  First,  it  is  convenient to  do  the  rooted  case,  that  is,  to  find  Z(K')
from  Z(D').  In  this  we  follow closely the  methods  of N o r m a n   7,  appro-
priately  generalized  to  yield  sums  of  cycle  indices  of  automorphism
groups.  A  brief exposition  of this  portion  of Norman's  dissertation  is  to
be found in Ford et al.  3.

A  branch  of a  connected  graph  G  at  a  point  u  is  a  maximal  connected
subgraph  of G  which  does  not  contain  u  as  a  cut-point.  If G is connected

E N U M E R A T I O N   OF  N O N - S E P A R A B L E   G R A P H S

341

and  contains  more  than  one  point,  every branch  at  u  must  contain  u,  and
each point of G is contained  in a branch  of G at u.  Moreover, two branches
of  G  at  u  contain  only  the  point  u  in  common,  else  their  union  would  be
a  connected  subgraph  of  G  in  which  u  is  not  a  cut-point.  It  follows  that
each  block  of  G  is  contained  in  exactly  one  branch  of  G  at  u,  and  con-
versely each block of a  branch  at u is a  block of G.

Let  K,'  be  the  subset  of  K'  consisting  of  those  graphs  with  exactly  n
branches  at the root-point.  The one-point rooted  graph is the only element
of K'  not  contained  in  one  of K,'  for n  ~ N.  Thus

Z(K')  =  1 +  ~  Z(KI,').

In  view  of the  considerations  of the  preceding  paragraph,  we  correspond
each  element  G  of Kn'  with  the  ~ - e q u i v a l e n c e   class  of the  configuration
from {1,...,  n} into  K l' which takes  each  1  ~< k  ~< n into  the k-th branch  at
the root-point,  considering  each branch  to  be rooted  at the  old root-point.
This  correspondence  is  1-1  and  preserves  automorphism  groups,  so  that
(9)  applies  and

Summing  over n,

z(K.')  =  Z ( ~ ) Z ( K , ' ) .

0o  a i

Z(K')  =  exp  E  --/- Z(K,').

(11)

i=1

LZMMA  1.

I f   G  is  a  connected  graph  other  than  K1,  then a point  u  is

a  cut-point  o f  G just  if it  is  contained  in  more  than  one  block  of G.

Proof.

I f  u is a  cut-point  of G, there  must be at least two branches  of G
at  u.  Then  u  must  belong  to  at  least  one  block  in  each  of these  branches,
and  we  have  seen  that  the  blocks  of  the  branches  are  blocks  of  G. Con-
versely,  suppose  that  u  is  not  a  cut-point  of  G  and  is  contained  in  blocks
B1,  B~ of  G.  Bx and  B~ must  contain  at  least  two  points  each,  and  hence
must  contain  points  vl  and  v2,  respectively,  which  are  different  from  u.
Since  u  is  not  a  cut-point  of  G,  there  must  be  a  path  from  vl to  v2 which
does  not  contain  u.  The  union  o f   B1,  B~,  and  this  path  is  seen  to  be
non-separable.  Thus  B1  =  B 2 , and  we conclude  that  u is in just  one block
of G.

A  limb  of G at a  subgraph  H i s   a  connected  component  of the graph  G*
obtained from  G by deleting  all the  lines which are in H.  It is clear that any
pair  of distinct  limbs  of G  must  be  disjoint,  for  if not  disjoint  their  union
would  be a  connected  subgraph  o f  G*.  If G is connected,  then  any limb  of
G  at  a  non-empty  subgraph  H  must  contain  at  least  one  point  of H.  F o r

342

ROBINSON

a  minimal  path  from  some  point  in  a  limb  to  H  must  contain  only  lines
outside  of H,  that  is, lines which  are in  G*.

LEMMA 2.

I f  B  is  a  block  of a  connected graph  G,  each  limb  of G  at  B

contains exactly  one point  of B.

Proof.  Since  B  is  non-separable  it  is  non-empty,  so  that  a  limb  of  G
at  B  must  contain  a  point  of B.  Now  suppose  that  u,  v are  distinct  points
of B  which  are  in  the  same  limb  of  G  at  B.  Then  there  is  a  path  from  u
to  v containing  no  line  of B.  Evidently  the  union  of B  with  this  path  is  a
non-separable subgraph of G which properly contains B. This is impossible,
so no  limb  of G  at B  contains  more than  one  point  of B.

Suppose A  and B are distinct blocks of a  graph  G. They have at most one
point  in  common,  for  otherwise  their  union  would  be  non-separable  and
A  =  B.  Thus  no  line  of G  is  in  both  A  and  B.  Consequently,  in  the  graph
G* obtained by deleting the  lines  of B  from G, all the  lines of A remain and
A  is  a  block  of  G*.  Any  point  of  G  which  is  in  no  block  of  G  besides  B
becomes  an  isolated  point  of  G*,  not  in  any block  of G*.  Thus  the  blocks
of G* are just  all of the  blocks  of G except B.

Suppose  G  E KI';  call  the  root  point  u.  Since  G  is  a  single  branch  at  u,
G  is  connected  and  u  is  not  a  cutpoint  of  G.  By  L e m m a   1,  then,  u  is  in
just  one block of G, which we  call the root-block.  By L e m m a  2,  a  limb of G
at  the  root-block  contains  a  unique  point  of  the  root-block.  Then  we
associate with  G the configuration which maps each point x  of B other than
u  to  the  limb  of  G  at  B  which  contains  x,  and  is  rooted  at  x.  Each  rooted
limb  is  seen  to  be  in  K'.  In  this  manner  we  establish  a  1-1  correspondence
between  elements  of  Ks'  which  have  root  and  root-block  isomorphic  to
some B1 e  D'  and  the  configurations  from B1 into  K'.  This correspondence
preserves automorphism groups.  Applying (9) and  summing over all of the
rooted  blocks  in  D'  gives

Z ( K I '   )  =  Z(D')a~Z(K').

(12)

The  factor  of a~ is to  restore  the  roots  of the  limbs,  which  are  not  the  root
of  the  entire  configuration.  Notice  that  K'  contains  the  constant  term  1
for  the  one-point  rooted  graph,  so  that  the  possibility  of isolated  limbs is
accounted  for.  Also,  the  limb  at  the  root-point  of  any  element  of  K (
is  always  isolated,  so  it  is  correct  not  to  allow  the  configuration  to  map
the  root-point  into  K'.

From  (11)  and  (12)  we  have

THEOREM 4.

'

=

e x

o o

p

tZ(D

'

z(K')11

.

a  1

E N U M E R A T I O N   OF  N O N - S E P A R A B L E   G R A P H S

343

Evidently  Theorem  4  suffices  to  determine  Z(K')  from  Z(D').  From

Theorem  1  we  have

Z(D')  = ~ I Z ( D )

and

Z(K')=g~-aZ(K).

By the fundamental  theorem  of calculus

a 1

Z(K)  =  f  Z(K') dal  +  Z(K)al  --+ 0.

0

Our  attention  is  now  focused  on  fixed-point  free  automorphisms  of

graphs  in  K.  In  order  to  enumerate  these  we  need

THEOREM 5.  Every  connected graph  which  has  a fixed-point free  auto-
morphism has a  unique  block  which  is invariant  under  all automorphisms of
the  graph.  No  other  block  is  invariant  under  any fixed-point  free  auto-
morphism of the graph.

Proof.  A  block of a connected graph G is an end-block just if it contains
at  most one  cut-point  of G. It is straightforward  that  any connected  graph
besides/(1  has  at least  one  end-block.  (See Tutte  17,  9.58.)  Let  H  be any
graph;  let  H ~~  =  H,  and  for  all  n  ~  0  let  H (~+*) be  the  subgraph  of H (~)
consisting  of  those  blocks  of  H ~'*) which  are  not  end-blocks  of  H (").
I f  H ~") :/=  ;~,  then  H ("+1) is  a  proper  subgraph  of H ~"). For,  if H (") is/s
then H ~n+l~ is empty. I f H  I") is not 321, then it contains  an end-block,  say B.
N o w   B  contains  at  least  two  points,  but  only  one  is  a  cut-point  of  H I")
(that is, contained  in  a  different block of HC~)). Thus  at least one point  of B
is not  in  H I"+~).

Now  let m  be  the  greatest integer  such  that  H ('') is not  empty.  We  have
seen that  there  must be such an  m.  Call H ~)  the  nucleus  of H.  The nucleus
must  be  preserved  by  every  automorphism  of H.  I f  H ~'~ is  321,  then  that
point  is  fixed  by  every  automorphism  of  H.  Suppose  instead  that  H ~")
contains  n  >  1 blocks.  Since  H ('+~)  =  ~ ,   each  block  of H ~m) is  an  end-
block of H ~'~. Let u be a  cut-point  of H ~J,  C  a  branch  of H ~)  at  u,  and  B
the  unique  block  of C  which  contains  u.  Any  cut-point  of C  is  a  cut-point
of H ('),  so  B  contains  no  such  point.  For  B  is  an  end-block  of H ~'*~ and
already  contains  the  cut-point  u  of  H ~m), which  is  not  a  cut-point  of  C.
It  follows  that  C  =  B.  Thus  each  branch  at  u  is  a  single  block,  and  u  is
the  unique  cut-point  of H ~).  Obviously u must  be fixed by every automor-
phism of H Ira), hence of H.

The  only  remaining  possibility  for  a  graph  H  with  a  fixed-point  free
automorphism is that its nucleus  H ~'~ be a  single block of H.  N o w  suppose

344

ROBINSON

that  some block B  of H  other  than  H (~) is left invariant  by some automor-
phism  h  of H.  Then  h  leaves  invariant  the  whole  limb,  call  it  C,  of H  at
H  tin) which  contains  B.  Since  h  leaves  C  and  H (m) both  invariant,  it  fixes
the  single  point  which  is  their  intersection.  Thus  H  (~)  is  left invariant  by
every  automorphism  of  H,  but  a  fixed-point  free  automorphism  of  H
leaves  no  other  block  of H  invariant.

Take  B  ~ D  and  a  m a p   ~ : B  ~  K',  a  typical configuration.  We  identity
each  point  x  of B  with  the  root-point  of  ~(x),  and  call  the  resulting  graph
~*.  Then  ~* is  in  K,  and  the  subgraph  B~ of  ~* with  which  B  has  become
identified  is  isomorphic  to  B.  Any  element  of-3ext(~)  corresponds  to  an
automorphism  o f   ~*  of the  same  cycle  type  which  leaves  B c fixed.  Thus,
if B ~ is not the  nucleus  of ~*, then  by Theorem 5 ~.~ext(~) has no fixed-point
free  elements.  Conversely,  any  automorphism  of  ~*  which  leaves  B ~ fixed
must  correspond  to  an  element  of-~ext(0.  By  Theorem  5  every  auto-
morphism  of  ~*  must  leave  B ~ fixed  if  it  is  the  nucleus,  so  in  that  case
-~ext(0  is  permutationally  isomorphic  to  the  automorphism  group  of  ~*.
Now,  if ~  : B  ~  K'  is  also  such  that  Be  is  the  nucleus  of  ~*  it  is  evident
that  ~* ~  ~* just  if ~ and  ~ are .~(B)-equivalent  as  configurations.  Apply-
ing  (9),  we  see that

which  is  equal  to

Z(B)alZ(K')

al  --*  0,

Z(B)al

--+ OalZ(K'),

just  gives the  fixed-point free contribution  to  Z(K)  from those  elements  of
K,  the  nuclei  of which  are  isomorphic  to  B.  Summing  over all  B  ~ D,

Z(K)al  ~  0  =  Z(D)al  --+ 0a~Z(K'),

o r

THEOREM  6.

Z(K)  -----  Z(K') dal  +  Z(D)al  --* 0alZ(K').

S?

Together Theorems 4  and  6 determine  Z(K) f r o m  Z(D).  As  an  example,
take  the  case  that  D  =  {K2}. Let  T  be  the  set  of connected  graphs  all  the
blocks  of which  are  isomorphic  to/(2  (cid:12)9 The  elements  of T  are  called  trees.
The  trees  on  less  than  7  points  are  pictured  in  Figure  3.  In  this  case
Z({K2}')  =  a l ,   so  that  by  Theorem  4

Z(T')  =  exp  ~,  a~.  alZ(T').

E N U M B R A T I O N   O F   N O N - S E P A R A B L E   G R A P H S

345

The  determination  of  Z(T')  from  this  relation  is  a  recursive  procedure;
we  illustrate  one  step.  Suppose  we  already  have

Z ( T ' )

=

1  +  al  +  }a~ ~ +  (cid:1)89  +  ~  ~  +  a~a~ +  (cid:1)89

8 a  3

4-(cid:1)89  al ~ +  (cid:1)88

4-  {a2 ~ +  ~axa3 +  (cid:1)88  4-  ....

Then

a~Z(T')  ~  ax  +  al ~ +  -~al ~ 4-  (cid:1)89

+  -~al ~ 4-  al2a~ 4-  (cid:1)89

+  (cid:1)89  ~ +  ~al3az  +  ~ala2 ~ +  ~al2az  4-  (cid:1)88

+  " " .

Now

so  that

~

~=1

a i
5
-:-  =  1  4-  E  Z($~)  4-  "",
I

.4=1

5
Z(T')  =  1 4-  ~  Z(~)alZ(T')
j = l

4-  " " .

Thus  we  compute  the  terms  of order  5 in  5 contributions;

Z(~I)alZ(T')

. . . .

4-  (cid:1)89

+  ~alZa2 4-  ~ala22 4-  ~a12a3

Z(~2)a~Z(T')

Z ( ~ ) f a ~ Z ( T ' )
Z(~4)a~Z(T')

4-  ~ala4  4-  "",
. . . .   +  ~a~ 5 4-  w

4-  (cid:1)89

4-  "",

. . . .   +  ~al ~ +  a?a~  +  ~a~a~ ~ +  "..,
. . . .

4-  ~al 5 4-  (cid:1)89

+  (cid:1)89

+  "",

Z(~5)alZ(T')

=  r(cid:1)89  5 4-  1J-~al3a2 4-  (cid:1)89

~ 4-  ~a12az 4-  (cid:1)88

4-  ~a2aa 4-  }as  +  "'..

In all, the  terms  of order  5 in Z(T')  are

_ _
~ a l  5 4-  (cid:1)89

+  ~ala~ ~ 4-  ~a~2a3 4-  (cid:1)89

.
4-  ~a~aa 4-  -~  5

1 a

Now  Z({Kz})a~  ~  0  =

(cid:1)89

so  by  Theorem  6

Z(T)  =

Z(T') da~  4-  ~ a2alZ(T')l.

(cid:1)89

=  (cid:1)89  +  (cid:1)89  +  ~a2 3 4-  la~a~  +  "",

Then

and

Z(T)  =  al  +  (cid:1)89  2 +  la~  +  1a13 +  (cid:1)89

+  w  4 +  1  2

~al  a~

+  (cid:1)89  z +  (cid:1)89

+  25,,  5

~,.1  +  ~a13a2 4-  -~ala2 z +  (cid:1)89

+  kala~  +  ~al ~ +

4- a  4 a  +  ~al2a2 ~ +  (cid:1)89
.  1

4-  ~a2 3

+  }al2a4  4-  }a2aa 4-  ~ala2a3 4-  ala5  4-  " " .

346

ROBINSON

This  is  readily  checked  by  totaling  the  cycle indices  o f  the  a u t o m o r p h i s m
groups  o f  the  trees  on fewer than  7  points,  which  are  listed  in Table  2.

I

2

3

8

I

12

_-  __  I
I

9

I0

I

1 3 .

/ :
\

_

:

FmURE  3

TABLE  2

Cycle Indices  of the  Automorphism Groups
of the Trees  on  Fewer  than  7  Points

Tree

Cycle index  of the  automorphism group

1
2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9

10
11

12

13

14

1

1

4

a  I
(cid:1)89  z  4-  ~a2
(cid:1)89  n  4-  1-ala2
1
fa
~a~  4-  ~a~
la14  4-  ~all  2a2  4-  -1-alan
(cid:1)89
2
4-  1
~ala~
z
~a15  4-  I
~ a l   a~
~+al n  +  ka,aa2  4-  ~ala2 2  4-  ~all  ~aa  +  lala,
1  6
~al  +
la~6  4-  la~a2  4-  ~a12a2 ~ -t-  ka= n  4-  -~-a2a,
gal
1  6 4 - 1
la16  4-  (cid:1)89

+  za  aaz

~al  a~
4

(cid:1)89  ~

.1_.~ "1 e~.~ 2

la16  4-
6
T2-~a,  4-  ~alaa~  4-

1

~a12a2 n  4-  lalnaz  4-  laxazaa  4-  la12a,  4-  ~a~a5

ENUMERATION  OF  NON-SEPARABLE  GRAPHS

347

Trees  were  first  enumerated  by  Cayley  2.  Otter  9  provided  the  first
treatment in terms  of generating functions.  Our result gives more informa-
tion  about trees, but  at the cost of greater complexity. Prins  12  has  gone
to  the  logical  extreme  of giving  a  procedure  for  generating  explicitly the
number  of trees with each automorphism  group.

Harary  and  Uhlenbeck  6

solved the  problem  of enumerating  all  con-
nected  graphs  with  certain  specific  sets  o f   blocks.  Norman  7  provided
the  solution  for  any  given  set  of blocks.  His  method  is  described  briefly
by Ford  et  al.  3.  Our  method  of determining  Z(K) from Z(D)  and  Z(K')
is  quite  different  from  the  corresponding  step  in  Norman's  solution.
The next section is devoted to deriving a  direct generalization of Norman's
solution.

Line  parameters  are  easily  introduced  into  our  results.  For  ease  in
expressing generalizations  of Theorems  1,  4,  and  6 we make  the following
convention. If

W, X,  Y~ Qal,

a2 ,...;  bl,  b2 .... 1,

then  WX;  Y  is  short  for

Wai  --+ Xa~  --+ aik;  b~ --+ bin;  bi --+  Ya~  --+ aiG b~ --+ bik.

Then  if X  _C H,

z~,L(x') =  ~  z~, L(x).

Also

and

oo  ak
Ze,L(K')  =  exp  ~,  -k-- Ze,L(D')a~Zv,L(K');

bi

k = l

Zp.L(K)  :

S: 1

Zp,L(K')  dax  -q- Ze,L(D)al

--+ OalZe.L(K');

bl.

Thus  Zp,L(K )  is determined from Ze,L(D). We may, of course, substitute y*
for b~ for all i  E N  in these results in case it is just the number  of lines that
is  of interest.

For  trees  the  introduction  of line  parameters  is  particularly  easy.  One

Zp, z(T')  :  Z(T')ai  -+  a~bi

Ze,z(T)  =

f l  1 Ze,L(T')  dal  +  l  bl(a2aaZe,L(T')).

sees that

and

582/9/4-3

348

ROBINSON

6.  NORMAN'S FORMULA FOR  GRAPHS WITH GIVEN BLOCKS

AS  in  the  previous  section,  D  is  a  set  of  non-separable  graphs  and  K

is the  set of all connected graphs,  the blocks  of which are in D.

THEOREM 7.

Z(K)  =  (ai  +  Z(D)  --  alZ(D'))alZ(K').

Proof.  Let  W----  (al  +  Z(D)  --  alZ(D'))alZ(K').

It  suffices  to  show

that  Wal  ~  0  ---- Z(K)al  --~ 0  and

Oa---~ W  =

Z(K).

First,  Wai  ~  0  ---- Z(D)aiZ(K')a
1 ~  0  directly,  and  the  latter  was
seen  to  be  Z(K)al  -+  0  in the  proof of Theorem 6.  In  order to  deal  with
the  derivatives,  it  is  convenient to  have  the  following

LEMMA 3.

I f   X,  Y 6 Q a i ,

a2 .... ,

then

Oa I(XY)  =  ~ X   Y ~ a   1  1.

Proof.  By the  chain rule,

8ai  (XY)  =  ~

Y  ~

(alY)  q-  -..

X
+  ( T ~ - a ~ )   Y  ~

(anY)  +  "'"

But anY  =  Yaj  --~ an~,  so that ifn  >  1 then

ea-~  (anY)

=  0.

On  the  other hand,  aiY  =  Y.

According  to  the  lemma  we  have,  as  a  result  of  applying  ~/~al  to  the

identity  of Theorem  4,

~ai

z(K')((
~

Z(D')alZ(K'))

0
(Z(K')  -t- a~-~a i

ENUMERATION OF  NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS

349

On  the  other hand,  our lemma appfied to  the definition of  W gives

0  W  =  (1  - - a l   ~al Z(D'))alZ(K')

~al

( Z ( K ' ) +   ax ~  Z(K'))

=  Z(I(')  --~ a 1

Z(K')

Z(K')

Z(I~'))  alZ(K')

)

(
(cid:12)9 ~Z(~')  +

Z(K')).
In view of our formula for (~/~al) Z(K'), this reduces to (D/Oal) W =  Z(K').
But

a l ~ a  1

Z(IC)  =  ~  Z(K)

by Theorem  1, so the proof of Theorem 7 is complete.

When sums of cycle indices ofautomorphism groups are the enumeration
medium  Theorem  6  is  much  easier  to  use  than  Theorem  7.  However,
Theorem  6  has  no  analog  for  ordinary  generating  functions,  whereas  in
Theorem  7  one  can  replace  Z(K)  and  Z(K')  by  ordinary  generating
functions(cid:12)9 In  this  connection it is worth  while to  note  that,  in Theorem  4
also,  Z(K') can  be replaced by an  ordinary generating function.

As  at  the  end  of Section  5  we  can  introduce  line  parameters  into  our

results.  Theorem  7  takes  the  form

Ze,z(K)  =  (ax q-  Ze,r(D)

- -

al  p r(D ))axZe,z(K  ), bl.

Z

~

!

!

7.  NON-SEPARABLE  GRAPHS

Let B be the set of all non-separable graphs, and B n the ones on n points.

From Theorem 4 we have

Z(C')  =  exp ~-'=1= a~ Z(B')alZ(C').

a o

(13)

The  calculation  of  Z(C)  is  discussed  in  Section  4,  and  by  Theorem  1

z ( c ' )   -

0  Z(C).

Thus  we  need  only  invert  (13)  to  find  Z(B').  The  simplest  method  of
inversion  conceptually  is  not  in  this  case  the  easiest  to  carry  out.  The
method we present takes advantage of the exponentiation for its efficiency.

350

ROBINSON

Let  C'c~ )  be  the  set  of  rooted  connected  graphs  such  that  any  block  con-
taining  the  root-point  contains  at  least  n  points.  Then  Z(C'I2))  =  Z(C'),
the  terms  o f  order  n  --  1  in  Z(CI,))  give  Z(B.'),  and  from  (13)

(cid:12)9
Z ( C ( i , + l ) )   =  Z ( C ( n ) )

"

(e

x p

k~__l--ae
=  T

Z ( B n ' ) a l Z ( C ' )

)

.

Thus  Z(B.')  is  determined  for  each  n  ~ N  inductively,  and

oo
z ( s ' )   =  Z  Z(B.'),
n = 2

F r o m  T h e o r e m  6 we find that

Z(C)a~  ~  01  =  Z(B)al  -+  Oa~Z(C')

(14)

If  B I'~) denotes  the  set  o f   non-separable  graphs  on  at  least  n  points,  then
(14)  gives

Z(B~S~)al  --+ 0alZ(C')

=  Z(C)a  1 - ~   0,

the  terms  of order  n in  Z(BInl)al  -~ 0alZ(C')
and

give exactly Z(B,)al  --~ 0,

Z(B~n+n)a~  ~  0alZ(C')

=  Z(BC"~)a~  --+ 0a~Z(C')

- -   Z(Bn)a  1 ~  0lalZ(C').

Thus  the  inversion  of  (14)  yields  Z(Bn)a  1 ~  0
and  summing  gives  Z(B)al  --+ 01.  Finally

inductively  for  each  n,

Z(B)  =

S?

Z(B')  da~  +  Z(B)a~  ~  0.

We  illustrate  the  computation  of  the  first  few  terms  o f   Z(B).  F r o m

Section  4  we  have

Z(CIz))  =  Z(C')  =  1  +

a I  @  2al ~ +  as  +  ~ - ~

-}- 4ala2  +  az  +  "",

so  Z(B2' )  =  a l .   Then

Z ( B 2 ' ) a l Z ( C ' ) I   =  a~Z(C')  =  al  +  a~ ~ +  2a~ 3 +  alas  @

...

and

oo

- - a / ~

exp  ~  T

Z ( B 2 ' ) a l Z ( C ' )

=  1  - -   a l   - -   (cid:1)89  2 - -   (cid:1)89

- -   ~al 3

- -

(cid:1)89

- -   (cid:1)89  T  " " .

ENUMERATION  OF  NON-SEPARABLE  GRAPHS

351

Multiplying  this  by  Z(C'~z))  gives

Z(C~3>)  =  1  +

(cid:1)89  2  +

(cid:1)89  +  ~al 3 +  2ala2  +

(cid:1)89  +  "'"

and

N o w

Z(B3')  =

(cid:1)89  2 +

(cid:1)89

Z(B3')alZ(C')

=

(cid:1)89  2  +

(cid:1)89

-1-  al 3  -b-  "",

exp

~

Z(B3')axZ(C')

=  1  - -   la~2  - -   la2  - -   al 3  ~:...,

and  multiplying  the  latter  b y   Z(CI3))  gives

Z(CI4))  :

1  Jr- ~al 3  +  2ala~  --

(cid:1)89  @  " " .

In  all,  then,

Z(B')  =  al  -q-  (cid:1)89  2  +

(cid:1)89  +  ~al 3  --  2ala2  --  3  3 --  "'"  (cid:12)9

-1 a

F o r   the  fixed-point  free  contribution,

Z(BIZ))al

--+ 0  alZ(C')

=  Z(C)al
(cid:1)89  +
=

- +   0

(cid:1)89  @  -a2 2 +

(cid:1)89  q-  " " .

Then

and

In  turn

and

In  all,

Z(Bz)a  1 --+ 0  =

(cid:1)89

Z(B2)al  ~  0alz(c')

=

(cid:1)89  +

(cid:1)89  ~ +  "",

Z(BI3))al

-->- 0alZ(C')

=

(cid:1)89  +

(cid:1)88  ~ +

(cid:1)89  +  "'"  (cid:12)9

Z(B3)a  1 --+ O  =

(cid:1)89

Z(B3)a  1 ~  0  a~Z(C')

=

(cid:1)89

-k  "",

Z ( B   (4))  =

(cid:1)88  2 +

(cid:1)89  +  " " .

Z(B)al  ~  0  =

(cid:1)89  +

(cid:1)89  +

(cid:1)88  2 +

(cid:1)89  +

. . . .

Finally,  adding  this  to  ~o 1 Z(B')  dal  gives

Z(B)  =

(cid:1)89  2 +
+

(cid:1)88  ~ +

(cid:1)89  +  ~al 3  +
lala3  +

+
(cid:1)89  +  " " .

(cid:1)89

la3  +  ~ a l   4  +  ax~a2

352

ROBINSON

The  terms  of order  4,  i.e.,  Z(B4),  are verified by  adding  the  cycle indices  of
the  automorphism  groups  of the  three  non-separable  graphs  on  4  points,
which  are listed in Table  1.

Once  Z(B.)  is  computed,  the  number  of  non-separable  graphs  on  n
points  is  found  by  summing  the  coefficients.  I f  the  number  is  all  that  is
required,  it  seems  that  a  great  deal  of  effort  is  expended  in  computing
extra information.  However,  there is no  way evident  to  dispense with Z(B)
and  work with the ordinary generating function  Z(B)ai  --* xq.  By applying
previously  noted  extensions  of  our  methods,  one  can  compute  ZP,L(B)
in  a  manner  similar  to  the  method  of  computing  Z(B).  In  this  case  one
cannot  deal  with  the  ordinary  generating  function

Ze.L(B)ai

--*  xi;  bi  --~ yi

alone.  However,  if  only  the  number  of  non-separable  graphs  on  a  given
number  of points  and lines is required,  one can  save some work by dealing
with  the  mixed  generating  function

Z e , L ( B ) a / ~   ai;  b, -+  yq

instead  of  Ze.L(B).

Extensive  hand  calculations  have  not  been  carried  out,  because
Osterweil  8  has  programmed  our  method  for  the  enumeration  of blocks
for  a  computer.  His  results  for  graphs  on  fewer  than  10  points  are  listed
in  Table  3.

TABLE  3

The Number of Graphs,  Connected  Graphs, and
Non-separable  Graphs on Fewer Than  10 Points

Points
Graphs
Connected graphs
Non-separable  graphs

1
1
1
0

2
2
1
1

3
4
2
1

4
11
6
3

5
34
21
10

6
156
112
56

7
1044
853
468

8

9
12346  274668
11117  261080
194066
7123

We  close  the  section  by  pointing  out  a  quick  solution  of  a  slightly
different  enumeration  problem  with  the  methods  we  have  developed.
A  bridge  of  a  graph  G  is  a  line  of  G,  the  deletion  of  which  results  in  a
disconnected  (or  empty)  graph.  A  graph  is  2-1ine-connected  just  if  it  is
connected  and  has  no  bridges.  It  is  easy to  see that  for a  connected  graph
this is equivalent to having no block isomorphic to/'22 (cid:12)9 Let B*  ----- B  -  {K~};
then

Z(B*)  =  Z ( B )   --  (cid:1)89  ~ --  (cid:1)89

ENUMERATION OF  NON-SEPARABLE GRAPHS

353

The  2-line-connected  graphs  are  easily  enumerated  by  the  methods  of
Section  5  or  6  since  they  are just  the  connected  graphs  with  blocks  in  B*.

8.  GRAPHS  WITHOUT END-POINTS

Let  L  be  the  set  of graphs  every point  of which  has  degree  ~  2.  Let M
be  the  set  of  connected  graphs  in  L.  Let  the  base of  any  graph  be  its
maximal  subgraph  which  is in  L;  this  subgraph  is  obviously unique  since
the  union  of  subgraphs  in  L  is  also  in  L.  Moreover,  if  G  is  a  connected
graph  then  its  base  is  either  empty  or  connected.  For,  if A,  B  are  distinct
connected  components  of  the  base  of  G,  then  some  path  in  G  joins  a
point  of A  to  a  point  of B.  The  union  of A,  B,  and  this  path  is in  M.  Thus
A  and  B would  be part  of the  same connected  component of the  base of G,
which  is  a  contradiction.

We  find  Z(M)  from  Z(C)  and  Z(T)  by  means  of a  relation  which  must

be inverted.

THEOREM  8.

Z(C)  =  Z(T)  §  Z(M)alZ(T').

Proof.  First,  we  claim  that  a  connected  graph  has  an  empty  base just
if  it  is  a  tree.  For  any  subgraph  of  a  tree  has  connected  components
which  are  trees.  It  was  shown  in  Section  5  that  any  connected  graph
besides/(1  has  at  least  one  end-block.  In  the  case  of a  tree  the  end-block
is/(2,  so the  point  which  is not  a  cut-point  has  degree  1. Thus  the  base  of
a  tree  is  empty.  Conversely,  if  a  connected  graph  is  not  a  tree  then  it
contains  some  block B  with  more  than  two  points.  It is  clear  that  B  ~ M,
since  B  is  non-separable.  Thus  the  base  contains  B,  and  is  non-empty.
Now  it  remains  to  see that  Z(the  elements  of  C  with  non-empty  bases)
is  just  Z(M)alZ(T').
I f   G  is  connected  and  has  a  non-empty  base  H,
we  correspond  G  with  the  configuration  which  maps  each  point  x  of  H
to  the  limb  of  G  at  H  which  contains  x  and  is  rooted  at  x.  We  have  seen
t h a t / - / ~   M.  Each  limb  C  of G  at  H  must be a  tree.  For,  if not,  the  base A
of  C  would  be  non-empty  and  the  union  of A  and  H  would  be  a  proper
supergraph  of H  which  is in  L,  an  impossibility.  We  must  also  argue  that
any limb  of G  at  H  eontains  exactly one  point  of H.  In  Section  5  we have
seen that  a  limb  of G at H  must  contain  at least one  point  of H  because  G
is  connected  a n d / - / n o n - e m p t y .   I f  a  limb  contains  two  points  of H,  then
the  path  in  the  limb  between  the  two  points  along  with  H  gives  a  proper
supergraph  of  H  which  is  in  L,  a  contradiction  of  the  fact  that  H  is  the
base  of  G.  Finally,  it  is  clear  that  our  correspondence  is  onto  all  possible

354

ROBINSON

configurations  from  an  element  of M  into  T',  is  1-1,  and  preserves  auto-
morphism  groups.  Thus  (9) gives the  desired result.

To  invert  Theorem  8,  notice  that  an  element  of  C  on  n  +  1 points  is
either in M,  or else has  a  base with  ~  n  points.  Thus  if M.  is the elements
of M  on  ~  n points  and Z(Mn) is known,  then the terms of order n  §  1 in

Z(C)  --  (Z(T)  +  Z(M.)aaZ(T'))

are  the  difference  Z ( M . + , ) -   Z(M.).  For  example,  suppose  we  have
determined  that

Z(M3)  =  ~-al 3 +

(cid:1)89

+  (cid:1)89

From  Section  5  we  have  alZ(T' )  =  al  q-  al 2 +  "",  so

Z(M3)alZ(T')  =  ~al 3 §  }aaa2 -k  (cid:1)89  +  }al 4 -+- (cid:1)89

-k  "".

Also,  from  Section  5,

Z(T)  =  al  4-  (cid:1)89  z -k  (cid:1)89  +  (cid:1)89  3 +  (cid:1)89

+  -~al 4 +  (cid:1)89

+  (cid:1)89  2

+  (cid:1)89

+  "",

while,  from  Section  4,

Z(C)  =  al  +

(cid:1)89  2 +

(cid:1)89  +  -~al 3  Jr- ala2 -}- la3  At-  19.,  4

~_~t~l  _J_  2G12a2

@  l a 2  2  "q- ~alaa +  (cid:1)89

-k  " " .

Thus

Z(M4)  --  Z(Ms)  =  ~ a l  a -k  a~2a2 +  3a~2 --  (cid:1)89

+  (cid:1)89

This  is  verified by  adding  the  cycle indices  of the  automorphism  groups
of the 3 connected graphs  on 4 points which do not have end-points, which
are listed in  Table I.

There  is  an  alternative  enumeration  of  graphs  without  end-points  by
Owings  10  which  proceeds  directly  from  first  principles.  It  is  rather
brutal  and  difficult to  apply, however.

Z(L)  may be  obtained from Z(M)  in  the  same way  that  Z(H)  is obtain-

ed  from Z(C) in Section 4. That is,

Z(L)  =  exp

~-  Z(M).

i=1

For  a  different  approach  to  determining  Z(L),  let  F  be  the  set  of forests
(graphs  with  connected  components  in  T).  Then  one  sees,  by  applying

co

expE%

i=1

l

ENUMERATION  OF  NON-SEPARABLE  GRAPHS

355

to both sides of Theorem 8, that

1 +  Z(H)  =  ( 1 %   Z(F))(1  @ Z(L)alZ(T')).

(15)

Now  (15)  is  readily  inverted  to  determine  Z(L)  from  Z(H),  Z(F),  and
Z(T').  In  Sections 3 and  5,  Z(H)  and Z(T)  are  determined, and

Z(F)  =  exp

oo

- =

Z(T).

It is easy to  modify our  results  so as to  include the possibility of points
of degree  0.  Let  L*  be  the  set  of all  graphs  without  end-points,  and  M*
the  connected graphs  in  L*.  It  is  clear  that  M*  =  M  w  {K1} and  L*  is
the set of connected  graphs  the  connected  components  of  which  are  all
in  M*.  Thus  Z ( M * ) :

a  I  ~-Z(M)  and

oo

Z ( D * )

:  exp ~  ~  a I  +  Z(M)

k----1 / s

oo

a  k

:  Z ( L ) e x p   ~ ,
2--1

T "

Line parameters  are easily introduced into Theorem 8 and  relation (15).

In fact,

and

Ze, z(C)  ~-  Ze,z(T)  +  Ze.z(M)alZ(T');  bl

1 +  Ze, L(H)  =  (1  +  Ze,r(F))(1  +  Z~,,L(L)alZ(T');  bll).

9.  SOLVED  AND  UNSOLVED  PROBLEMS

The  enumeration  of  k-connected  graphs  or  k-line-connected  graphs
remains  open  for  k  >~ 3.  It  seems  reasonable  to  believe,  however,  that
moderate extensions of our methods will suffice for the case of 3-connected
graphs. The methods of the present paper can be used to enumerate acyclic
digraphs.  The  closely related problem  of enumerating transitive  digraphs,
however,  seems  to  be  much  more  difficult and  remains  open.  In  the  area
of partition  restrictions,  extensions  of  our  methods  suffice to  enumerate
homeomorphically irreducible graphs  (that is, without points  of degree 2),
and  also  cubic  graphs.  The  enumeration  of k-regular  graphs  for  k  >  3,
by  contrast,  seems  much  less  accessible.  The  results  on  acyclic digraphs,
homeomorphically  irreducible  graphs,  and  cubic  graphs  will  appear
elsewhere.

356

ROBINSON

REFERENCES

1.  C.  C.  CADOGAN, The  MObius  Function  and  Connected  Graphs,  to  appear  in  J.

Combinatorial  Theory.

2.  A.  CAYLEY, Collected  Mathematical  Papers,  Cambridge  Univ.  Press,  Cambridge,

1889-1897:  Vol.  3, pp.  242-246;  Vol.  11, pp.  365-367.

3.  G.  W.  FORD, R.  Z.  NORMAN, AND  G.  E.  UHLENBECK, Combinatorial  Problems

in  the  Theory  of Graphs,  II,  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  42  (1956),  203-208.

4.  F.  HARARY, The  Number  of  Linear,  Directed,  Rooted,  and  Connected  Graphs,

Trans.  Amer.  Math.  Soc.  78  (1955),  445-463.

5.  F.  HARARY, Graph  Theory,  Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Mass.,  1969.
6.  F.  HARARY AND  G.  E.  UHLENBECK, On  the  Number  of  Husimi  Trees,  I,  Proc.

Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  39  (1953),  315-322.

7.  R.  Z. NORMAN, On the Number  of Linear Graphs  with Given Blocks, Dissertation,

University of  Michigan,  1954.

8.  L.  OSTERWEIL, Enumeration  of  Nonseparable  Graphs  on  Fewer  Than  10  Points,

to appear.

9.  R.  OTTER, The  Number  of  Trees,  Ann.  of Math.  49  (1948),  583-599.
10.  J.  C.  OWINGS, JR.,  Combinatorial  Methods  in  Graph  Theory,  Honors  Thesis,

Dartmouth  College,  1962.

11.  G.  POLYA, Kombinatorische  Anzahlbestimmungen  ffir  Gruppen,  Graphen,  und

chemische Verbindungen,  Acta  Math.  68  (1937),  145-254.

12.  G.  PRIMS, On  the  Automorphism  Group  of  a  Tree,  Dissertation,  University  of

Michigan,  1957.

13.  J.  H.  REDFmLD, The  Theory  of  Group  Reduced  Distributions,  Amer.  J.  Math.

49  (1927),  433-455.

14.  R.  J.  RIDDELL,  Contributions

to  the  Theory  of  Condensation,  Dissertation,

University  of  Michigan,  1951.

15.  R.  W.  ROBINSON, Enumeration  of  Colored  Graphs,  J.  Combinatorial  Theory

4  (1968),  181-190.

16.  R.  W.  ROBINSON, Enumeration  of Euler Graphs,  Proof Techniques  in  Graph  Theory

(F.  Harary,  ed.,),  Academic  Press,  New  York,  1969.

17.  W.T.  TtrrrE,  Connectivity in Graphs,  University of Toronto Press,  1966,  Chapter 9.

